Rather than uplifting minority populations, American history repeatedly portrays a prejudiced depiction that glorifies white people in control. Nevertheless, traditionally oppressed groups use reclamation movements to rewrite America's complicated past toward a brighter future, using opposition as a powerful weapon. As demonstrated in Lin Manuel Miranda's Hamilton, embellished with modern-day rap culture and supplemented with revolutionary casting, acts of subtle defiance newly define glory for actors of color. The story of Alexander Hamilton in Miranda's rendition provides hope to an immigrant generation, displaying the strength that Hamilton, the star of the show, embodies in his come up from an "orphan, son of a whore, and immigrant" to a successful businessman, influential political figure, and "genius" ("Alexander Hamilton"). Hamilton's colleagues ridicule him for his humble beginnings, juxtaposing his success as a political mogul with his struggle as an immigrant. With grit and determination, Hamilton created a name for himself in New York City, becoming a pioneer in the political sphere and redefining the country's economic structure after the Revolutionary war, achievements not traditionally associated with immigrants from the Caribbean. Similarly, female pioneers in contemporary literature have followed Hamilton's groundbreaking footsteps. While the narratives of American history strive to keep formerly oppressed people on narrow paths towards defeat, individuals like Naisha from Johnson's My Monticello and Emma from "The Secret Lives of the Nine Negro Teeth of George Washington" deviate from the traditional trajectory laid out for people of color through acts of resistance. 
In physical presence, Naisha, My Monticello's heroine, inserts herself into the home of her ancestors' white oppressor during racial unraveling to reclaim her family's history. In Charlottesville, Virginia, My Monticello pushes the boundaries between the connections of ancestry and heritage and its impact on future descendants. During a white supremacist attack, Naisha and her grandmother stumble upon Jefferson's estate, dismantling the racism and oppression that her ancestors once battled as enslaved people. While Naisha had visited Monticello before, from class trips to spending a summer working at the mansion, she had never dreamed of living in the private rooms or exploring the secret passages Jefferson planned to conceal from his slaves. Upon arriving in Monticello, she confronts her family's history of slavery without hesitation, literally stepping foot into the home of her ancestor's brutal abuser. Although Naisha "had always felt some measure of the distance" barricaded by "a wall between whatever Monticello was and [her] real life," she fails to maintain this separation upon inhabiting Monticello (110). Monticello represents everything Naisha was never meant to uncover or accomplish, filled with ornate and plush detailing in every room, artifacts wrongly stolen from indigenous populations, and confidential documents privy to the white elite of Jefferson's time. American history desires to hide Naisha and her family in "the reconstructed cabin made of roughly hewn wood for the dwellings for enslaved people" or "the bare plot of ground marked by the lowliest sign," marginalized from the extravagant luxury of the manor. Yet, she confidently enters the "grand white dome of the main house with handsome brick and double-storied windows framed by green shutters." Naisha disassembles the systemic racism of slavery in a small act of defiance, placing her grandmother and herself in the home of her ancestor's abuser. Naisha's community before the attack was "all too often undermined and undervalued," falling victim to the cycles of poverty and racism written by the American government. But, Naisha disobeys the past by "seesawing between painful heritage" and a victorious future free from oppression. Naisha illuminates the physical presence of her ancestors at Monticello, from uplifting the "slaves that would forge nails and weave fabric" to honoring "the blank hands sunk in mortar." By illustrating the power of her predecessor's manual labor, she credits the triumph of Jefferson at Monticello to the work of the enslaved people, directly paying homage to her family.
Like Naisha's digression from the typical path of oppression destined for people of color, Emma in "The Secret Lives of The Nine Negro Teeth of George Washington" defies the odds as a dreamer and powerful sorceress at Mount Vernon. On the surface, Emma, one of Washington's earliest "possessions," complacently showed commitment to her duties and respect for her master. However, Emma "had befriended, loved, married, cried, drought and found succor in her community," dreaming beyond the confines of Washington's plantation (124). Clark exemplifies that Emma's dreams are limitless, as she even aspires to start a family of her own, paving the way for a future generation of liberty. Cultivating a secret land filled with "a strong and potent magic that she clung to that grew up and blossomed inside of her," Emma uses her imagination and dreams to find peace and comfort under Washington's brutality. Although "Emma didn't know any particular sorcery," she used creative brilliance and fantasy to her advantage, even training in "domestic enchantments." Emma's "dreams worked their magic" on Washington, leading him to free enslaved people after his death. When Emma's tooth is inserted into Washington's mouth, drawing on the same physical power as Naisha's ancestor at Monticello, Washington dramatically alters his sentiments towards his slaves. Washington even "stipulated in his late will that the 123 slaves belonging to himself, among them Emma, be freed upon his wife's death." Emma's power extended far beyond the bounds of her mind and influenced Washington's decision to free his enslaved people from Mount Vernon. As Naisha breaks down the boundaries that kept her family in the cyclical oppression of American history's one-sided narrative, Emma uses her mysticism to fight for her freedom. Emma "troubles some bit of Washington's soul" purely through her sorcery and dreams, leading to momentum and change for formerly enslaved people to build lives outside of a plantation. Emma was the only enslaved person released after George Washington's death that had given him a tooth, as Clark notes that "no such stipulations were made for Negro teeth still in his possession." Emma inserts her existence and strength into Washington, ultimately impacting his decision to free her and subsequent enslaved people because of her mind’s extraordinary powers.
Although American history attempts to keep people of color, primarily enslaved population and their descendants, in lanes of oppression and manipulation, influential individuals like Emma from "The Secret Lives of the Nine Negro Teeth of George Washington" and Naisha from My Monticello disrupt the status quo in acts of subtle confrontation. During a white supremacist insurgence in futuristic times, Naisha, the protagonist of My Monticello, becomes the leader of her survival group and settles in the home of her ancestor and former white perpetrator, Thomas Jefferson. Naisha uses Jefferson's house to reclaim her ancestor’s bodily labor and struggle. While honoring the hard work, suffering, and brutal abuse of formerly enslaved people, Naisha retells the story of her family's past and defies the odds of American history's traditional novels that suppress the tragedies of slavery. Comparably, Emma, one of Mount Vernon's first slaves and Washington's "prized possessions," uses the power of her mind and dreams to rebel against the traditional standards for enslaved people. Emma's brilliance manifests its authority in Washington upon her tooth's insertion into his mouth, eventually leading him to free enslaved people from Mount Vernon; Washington would have never considered this liberty for his slaves before Emma's influence. In one-dimensional and discriminatory tones, American history frequently propels people of color towards routes of mediocrity and decline. Nonetheless, through resistance and rebellion, leaders like Emma and Naisha disrupt the norm for people of color. 