Format
Hour 1
	40-45 multiple choice
	75% stimulus based
	2 short answers
 	(1 required, 2nd choose from 2)

Hour 2
	DBQ
	(Don't think this will be from period 2 or 5)

Mr. Beattie hints
Developments for period 2 important
**Indentured servitude to slavery
Look at connections between like period 2 and 5 (can’t put these connections on period tests but can on exam)
Ex) period 4 reform like great awakenings
American exceptionalism in every period
**New england colonies vs chesapeake (maybe vs deep south) colonies
These geographical differences are more important than colony vs colony
Don't need to know all of each colony material

Period 2:
Jamestown - 1607, founded by John Smith. Goal of finding riches. Relied on indentured servitude/tobacco (started by John Rolfe) and adopted the headright system. Sig: first permanent British settlement in North America.

House of Burgesses - est. 1619 by Governor George Yeardley, in Virginia, first elected assembly in colonial America. Members appointed by the Virginia Company/ Sig: Creates political precedence that all English colonies will follow similar structure. 

Powhatan Confederacy - created around 1580, this was an alignment of Native tribes near Jamestown, ruled by Powhatan (father to Pocahontas). Sig: Helped Jamestown survive first winter/taught them to grow corn and tobacco; eventually become tribes that early Jamestown conflicts with

Chesapeake Bay - first entered in 1607, broad term to encompass colonies such as Virginia and Maryland.  Settlers came here to escape poverty/make money. Thrived on indentured servitude (and then slavery), in order to cultivate tobacco. Sig: difference in Southern mentality shows South mentality of civil war. 

Mayflower Compact - 1620, a document signed by pilgrims on the boat to Plymouth. Says that self-government and authority comes from God and the King. Intended to cause men going ashore to follow just/equal laws.  Sig: foreshadows self-governing theme; first written frame of modern - US 

Plymouth Colony - 1620, British colony founded by pilgrims (Puritan separatists) who wanted a better life and religious freedom. Important people include William Bradford, William Brewster, and Miles Standish. Sig: showed many of modern day themes, such a consent to government, and voting for non-church members. 


Puritanism - popularized in the 1530s, religious sect that did not support religious toleration. Believed that freedom was opportunity and responsibility to God's will. Came to NE for religious separation from Catholics/for formation of their own society.  Different puritan sects made up MBC/Plymouth pilgrims. Sig: first Brits to come to New England. Strict religious policies caused certain people to leave, creating new colonies (RI, Carolinas, etc.) 

John Winthrop - founded MBC in 1630 leaving England for religious freedom.  English Puritan. His set-up created a basis for established religion in New World (Puritans only)  Sig: founded MBC, wrote a Model of Christian Charity

Massachusetts Bay - 1630, founded by the Massachusetts Bay Company. Initial residents were a group of Puritans (mostly in families) notably John Winthrop and Thomas Dudley, who wanted to form their own religious utopia. Sig:  leads to great Migration 


Roger Williams - founded Rhode Island in 1636. Leaves MBC because he was a dissenter. Founded Rhode Island on religious freedom, elected assemblies, and frequent town meetings. Believed that Natives had ownership over their land. Sig: founded RI, advocated for separation of church and state. 


Anne Hutchinson - arrived in MBC in 1634. She was a women with dissenting ideas and condemned church officials for distinguishing “saints” based on activities rather than an actual state of inner grace. Pushed out of MBC. Sig: helped start/grow RI, advocated for women. Good example of how Puritans treated opposition.  


Great Migration - 1620-1640,  movement of Puritans from England to New England (Massachusetts Bay), to gain religious freedom/land. Sig: helped Massachusetts to grow, which was needed for strong community values. 


Pequot War - 1636 massacre of Pequots, 
	Who: Coalition of CT/Mass/Saybrook Colonies vs. Pequots
	Why: catalyst: fur trader killed by pequots
	What: conn and mass soldiers set pequot village on fire and killed anyone who tried to escape
and war lasted a few months after
	Significance
500 died
Most pequots died or got sold into slavery
Treaty that ended war required pequot tribe to be erased
Indians became scared by British military

Half-Way Covenant - 1662 religious act that in MBC allowed baptism and partial church membership to colonists whose parents were not puritan
	Significance: lessened gap between elect members of church and regular church go-ers, allows women to come #rights. Reaction to not a lot of church membership. Increased church membership

Toleration Act - 1689, allowed all protestants in colonies to worship freely. Instated by england when the throne went from catholic to protestant right before the glorious revolution
	Significance: 
Anglican church looses power
No more massachusetts bay “castle on a hill”
New england 
Puritans need to tolerate
Maryland
Settled as catholic but needs to tolerate all religions



King Philip’s War - 1675-1678 Huge war between the Natives (mainly wampanoag) and settlers
	Why: colonists encroaching on Native’s land. Catalyst: colonists killed some indians in a
squabble
Where: Massachusetts, connecticut, Rhode Island
What: Wamponoag under Metacom/ king philip attacked farms and settlements →
settlements pushed back to coast. Settlers responded by killing and selling Indians into slavery and indentured servitude
Significance:
Wamponoag gone
British military deemed as cruel and inhumane
British had more land to settle
Terrible war

Mercantilism - 16th to 18th century idea that the government should regulate economic activity to promote national power. 
Encouraged commerce and manufacturing
Wealth measured in gold and silver = fixed amount of wealth in the world
Exports should exceed imports
Colonies crucial to generate raw materials
Followed throughout Europe, especially by British

Navigation Acts - 1651 (also one in 1660 but not sure if we need to know that one/what it means) passed by english parliament to control colonial trade and boost British mercantilism. Required merchants to engage in trade with english colonies exclusively on english ships. Trade items had to be passed through british ports where they were taxed/ tariffs
	Significance:
Helped in British gaining control of world trade from dutch
Rise of new england's ship building industry
Angered colonists


Bacon’s Rebellion - 1676 rebellion inspired by Nathaniel Bacon between Virginian classes and gov
	Who:
	Governor William berkeley
Royally appointed governor
Gave political influence to wealthy = corrupt gov
Right to vote only for land owners starting in 1670
Gave them land grants
Created huge wealth gap
Peaceful with indians
Berkeley profited from trade and wanted peace
Angered colonists who wanted their land

	Nathanial Bacon
Wealthy and ambitious planter
Promised freedom to everyone in his army
	Why:
Berkeley policies (feudal system, protect natives)
Social class tension
Small confrontations of elites and indians and elites demanding that berkeley let them take the Native’s land → rebellion of elite against berkeley
Once tension started exploding everyone joined fight
	What:
Began with indian massacres and killing Berkley’s allies
Stormed and burned Jamestown
Berkley fled and Bacon sick
War boats from England ended rebellion
	Significance
Indentured servitude → slavery
Lower virginian class fed up and slaves will never gain land = less land arguments 
More aggressive stance against natives
Virginia elite have corrupt image
Revolt against crown (Berkely was appointed by British gov)


Glorious Revolution - 1688. William of Orange (Dutch) and Mary (Protestant) overthrow Catholic King James II in England. They overthrew him because of religious disagreement. Sig: Permanently establishes Parliament as the ruling power of England (shift to constitutional monarchy). Lead to series of revolts against officials appointed by King James II in colonies. 

Salem Witch Trials - 1692 series of accusations of witchcraft in Salem, Massachusetts
	Why: 
many people believed in evil spirits in the 17th century and girls having fits and nightmares which people attributed to witch craft (looking for signs-puritan way)
once accusations began the only way to avoid persecution is to accuse others = snowball effect
witchcraft was punishable by execution
	What: many put in trial and 14 women and 5 men hung. Mass gov dissolved salem court and released prisoners
	Significance:
Colonial crisis
Made people think mass was crazy especially with enlightenment
made it clear something was wrong with the justice system
Cases of conscience concerning evil spirits by Increase Mather
Warning not to take witchcraft seriously


	

William Penn - Founder of Pennsylvania with land grant from king, Quaker whose goal was to create refuge for other quakers being persecuted in England
	Significance:
Pennsylvania values
Religious freedom, equality, liberty
Harmony with natives
Wanted to set example like Massachusetts
Morals of the colony attracted many settlers

Society of Friends - 17th century, aka Quakers. Quaker William Penn founded Pennsylvania in 1677 because he wanted a colony of religious freedom/peaceful relations with Indians.  Sig: Pennsylvanians first group to free slaves, treated Natives better, had actual appointed council

Middle Passage - late 16th century to early 19th century, middle passage of triangular trade horrible and deadly journey from africa to america on slave ships
What:
transported around 12 million slaves arrived in the Americas
 1 in 5 slaves survived
Disease spread rapidly on the ships
Diseased/ dead slaves often thrown overboard


Stono Rebellion - 1739,  group of slaves from South Caroline carried out rebellion burning houses/killing Whites. Rebelled for “liberty.” Sig: leads to severe tightening of Carolina Slave codes and a temporary tax on imported slaves. Also, shows that contrary to the popular belief, slaves were interested in personal liberty. 


Zenger Trial - 1735, in New York, trial of Peter Zinger, a publisher who had called out a royal governor, William Cosby,  for corruption in his newspaper. Sig: huge step in the direction of free press/redefined liability; Zenger was guilty of printing bad things against Cosby, but since those things were true, he won the trial. 

Salutary Neglect - principle ended in 1763 (french indian war), economic policy of the European government that meant they were mercantilist but only passed laws to regulate trade in colonies and did not enforce the laws. Sig: colonists governed themselves during the period of salutary neglect, so when it ended they felt suffocated leading to the American Revolution. 

Deism - enlightenment thought that god created earth and then stopped intervening
	Significance
Emphasized reason, morality, and natural law
Opposition to this idea helped cause Great Awakening 

Great Awakening - 1730s, religious revival in North American colonies. Lead by George Whitefield (amazing traveling preacher) and Jonathan Edward, who promoted Evangelicalism, and questioning the papacy. Caused by opposition to English Enlightenment, Deism, a conflict between elite/masses, materialism, and printing press. Sig: lead to further denominations of religions popping up, printing press, personal connection to God. Lead to American Revolution by encouraging nationalism/individual rights. 

French-Indian War - 1754-1763, aka the 7 years War. Conflict between French/Indian alliance and British in bordering colonies. Britain won ending in the Treaty of Paris. Caused by land disputes in Ohio Valley; VA planters decide that Ohio Valley is theirs, get into conflict with Natives/others, British step in. Sig: 
Europe Effects: 
Establishes Great Britain as global superpower
French leaving North America
French Economic crisis and then the French Rev., 
slavery becoming more central to the economy
Ends salutary neglect (Brits need more $/British presence in colonies)
British gets territorial gains but loses a lot of money, leading to colonial discontent/American Rev. 
Albany Plan
Native American Effects:
Creation of single national identity for Natives
Natives dependent on British for land (feuds)
Less autonomy for Natives like Iroquis

Pontiac’s Rebellion - 1763, Natives rebellion against British rule
	Neolin (mastermind)
Native American religious prophet
Preached: natives should reject British settlers and take back their territory, stop being dependent on white for goods and alcohol, Natives must cooperate to overthrow British
effects
attack on detroit, major British military outposts, nine forts and death
Proclamation of 1763

Proclamation of 1763 - British reaction to Pontiac’s rebellion, not to be nice to natives, but to stop uprisings. Law stopped private settlement of Appalachian mountains, only gov could make decisions about land distribution, made settlers angry. 

Albany Plan - 1754, Ben Franklin’s proposal to unify colonies though a council of delegates from each colony. Council would cooperate on taxes, what to do about Natives, a common defense. Rejected by colonial assemblies. Purpose to help fight war

Period 3:
Proclamation of 1763 - royal directive issued by after the French Indian War prohibiting settlement, surveys, and land grants west of the appalachian mountains, reaction to Pontiac’s rebellion
Significance: caused considerable resentment among colonists hoping to move west

Sugar Act (1764) - decision by parliament to tax refined sugar and other colonial goods
Significance: under cut smuggling of tea; reduced colonial export to non-Brits and hurt America, Americans felt oppressed

Stamp Act (1765) - lead by loyal nine (group of merchants/craftsmen) parliaments requirement that revenue stamps be asphyxiated to all colonial printed matter (documents, letters, playing cards) repealed the following year due to colonists resentment 
Significance: first direct tax used by British on colonies; lead to declaratory act in which British goods were boycotted until Parliament stopped; lead to lots of documents calling out British; offended every colonist as opposed to just the elite

Quartering Act- 1765, passed because the British wanted more soldiers in colonies post Pontiac’s Rebellion; required colonial governments to provide and pay for feeding and sheltering any troops stationed in their colony. Sig: colonists resented because it was an unjust taxation, references to hatred of this appear in Declaration of Independence

Declaratory Act - 1766, accompanied the repeal of the Stamp Act; stated that Parliament could make laws binding the American colonies in all cases. Sig: way for Britain to assert their dominance over colonies #alphas

Townshend Act (Duties) (1767) - parliamentary measures that taxed tea and other commodities and established a board of customs commissioners and colonial vice-admiralty courts. Sig: leads to Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania, demonstrates that enlightenment ideals still held true, shows that American leaders still think 
Lead to Boycott and homespun virtue


Boston Massacre (March 5, 1770) - clash between British soldiers and Boston mob. 5 colonists killed; Significance: Paul Revere leads defamation campaign against British; demonstrates that British will resort to violence against colonists and strengthens cries for Independence

Boston Tea Party (December 16, 1773) - sons of liberty dressed as Indians and dumped hundreds of chests of British East India company tea into Boston harbor to protest the Tea Act. 
Significance: leads to intolerable acts, British shut down Boston Harbor until tea is paid for; independence symbol


Coercive (Intolerable) acts (1774) - four parliamentary measures in reaction to the boston tea party that forced payment for the tea, disallowed colonial trials of British soldiers, forced british troop quartering in private homes and reduced the number of elected officials in Massachusetts
Significance: lead to spirit of liberty, lead to justification of Convening First Continental Congress

Quebec Act - 1774, passed by British Parliament and impacts Quebec, allows legal toleration to Roman Catholics in Canada.  Sig: Colonists get angry because they think British are trying to Strengthen Catholicism 


First Continental Congress- 1774, convention of delegates from 13 colonies except georgia? that formed in Philadelphia; 
Significance:
Reaction to Intolerable Acts
Inspired by enlightenment

Second Continental Congress - 1775, establishes articles of confederation, establishes declaration of independence

Constitutional 

Lexington-Concord (1775) - Force of British soldiers marched from boston to concord CT to take weapons being stockpiled there by militia men
Significance: considered first battle of revolutionary war BUT not fought for independence rather against British taxation and tyranny


Common Sense (1776) - pamphlet written by Thomas Paine (immigrant from england) that attacked the English principles of hereditary rule and monarchial government and encouraged american independence. Inspired by Olive Branch Petition by congress to George III (attempt to reconcile with britain by stating America’s loyalty to the crown). Also inspired by European Enlightenment ideas (anti monarch and pro freedom/ democratic governance). 
Significance:  
Not new ideas but he expressed them well
For everyone to read not just elite
Huge reason colonists went from wanting british citizen rights to independence
Suggested 
democratic system with frequent elections and citizens rights protected by a constitution
Britain burden on colonies

Declaration of Independence (1776)
Influenced by enlightenment thought
Written by Jefferson
Started revolutionary war
Causes 
Enlightenment thoughts
Cost of seven years war = tax
Sons of liberty, boston tea party, intolerable acts 
Meetings after battle of concord ect
Olive branch petition and england's rejection 



Battle of Saratoga (1777)- fought in NY, known as turning point in the Revolutionary War. Significance: victory convinces the French/Dutch/Spanish troops that the US may actually win the war, so they ally with Continental Army 

Battle of Yorktown (October 19, 1781) 
More frenchmen than americans fought 
Shows power of forign alliances
Cornwallis (British) surrendered his army of 8,000 men
When news got to london, the british citizens lost hope for winning the war
Britain began negotiating peace treaties
Thought colonies were less valuable than west indies
And Britain would still dominate colonial trade



Peace of Paris (1783) - treaty that ended revolutionary war, established border between canada and US and western border at mississippi river. Gave florida to spain. Persecution of loyalists stopped and property stolen from them was returned (Property was never actually returned)
Significance: recognized American independence


Shay’s Rebellion(1786) - uprising by western massachusetts farmers lead by Daniel Shay, to seek debt relief through insurance of paper currency and lower taxes, to prevent courts from seizing property from indebted farmers
Significance: proved AOC is trash


Constructionism - how much you adhere to the constitution. Can it be interpreted?
Loose - federalists
Gov has rights not listed in constitution

Strict - democratic republicans
Gov can’t do anything not listed in constitution



Whiskey Rebellion (1794) - violent protest by western pennsylvania farmers against tax on whiskey. Farmers produced grain which whiskey was made of so it affected them a ton. Ended by Washington. Significance: Proved strength of federal government; also fueled Federalist idea that the Republicans were riff raff

Jay’s Treaty (1794) - treaty with Britain negotiated by John Jay, chief of justice, Britain agreed to vacate forts in northwest territories and end American impressment (force americans to work for british especially on ships), but Britain gets special trading relationship with US
Significance: Controversial - US acknowledged Britain as economic and naval power and US trade was more regulated. During European war so kinda ended alliance between France and US


Pinckney's Treaty(1795) - treaty between Spain and US. diplomatic success. US has rights to use mississippi river and boundary between US and Spain at 31st parallel
Thomas Pinckney
Governor of south carolina
Went to constitutional conventions
Federalist



Washington’s Farewell Address (1796) - 1796 speech drafted by hamilton made when washington decided to leave office after 8 years to establish democratic presidency. Published in newspapers more than orally delivered. Defended washington administration, warned against dividing party spirit, steer clear of international power politicals by avoiding permanent alliances


XYZ Affair (1797) - adams tried to get france to stop seizing American trading ships that were headed to GB. (war between GB and France) affair in which three anonymous french agents (X,Y, and Z) demanded bribe to stop french plundering of American ships. Refusal to pay the bribe was followed by two years of undeclared seas war with France.
Significance: Adams created bad international affairs, Quasi war between france and US at sea (Adams negotiated peace in 1800)



Alien and Sedition Acts
	Sedition (1798) - made it a crime to make spoken or written statements that criticised the
US government. Compared to Salem Witch Trials because ten editors were
unreasonably put in jail (“reign of witches”)
	Alien (1798) - Allowed deportation of people who seemed dangerous to federal
Authorities
Targeted at irish and scottish (against US pro british leadings)
Significance: criticism of adams-negative domestic affair, led to virginia and kentucky resolutions, unconstitutional; made freedom of discussion huge issue i nAmerica


Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions - democratic republican’s response to the alien and sedition acts . Advanced the state-compact theory of the revolution
Significance: argue that federal government has no authority to exercise not specifically delegated it to the Constitution; set precedent that states have the rights to declare laws passed by Congress to be unconstitutional. 
Virginia(1798) - written by James Madison and passed by virginia legislature
Kentucky(1799) -  written by Thomas Jefferson and passed by kentucky legislature

State could nullify federal laws the state thought was unconstitutional



REVOLUTIONARY FIGURES
George Washington
Commander in chief of continental army
1789 - first president of US
federalist
Wanted to preserve liberty and destiny of republican gov
Symbol of national unity
Vice pres= john adams
Jefferson = secretary of state
Hamilton = head of treasury

Roger Sherman
federalist
Proposed great compromise




Alexander Hamilton
Head of treasury under washington
Federalist
Wrote majority of federalist papers - large role in ratification of the constitution
5 year economic plan
Goal
Establish financial stability and encourage economic development
Centralize economy in federal gov
5 part plan
Establish credit worthiness
Pay off state’s debt and make that national debt
Issue bonds to pay off debt
Creation of bank of the US
Whiskey tax
Mercantilist measures
Tariff, subsidies to industry (road and bridge building)
Opposition
Jefferson and madison believed future was in westward expansion and free trade of tobacco and grain, ect
hamilton threatens freedom
Opposition came mainly from the south who said hamiltons plans were unconstitutional
Hamilton said elastic clause
Eventually agreed with national bank but located in the south

John Adams
2nd president of US
Controversial 
federalist


Thomas Jefferson
Secretary of state for washington
3rd president in 1800
Head of democratic republican party
Wrote:
Declaration
Beliefs(as a democratic liberal)
Unrestricted/free trade
Freedom of Religion/Press

Significance/what he and his presidency changed:
Judicial 
Political/Presidential
Judicial Review
Court is not frivolous with this (they use it not all the time) 
Marbury vs. Madison
Failed to appoint any strong Republican voices to SCOTUS
First impeachment of judges
War on judicial tyranny (he thought they were too tyrannical) 
TJ Repealed Judiciary Act of 1801 (reduces Supreme court from 6 to 5, says supreme court justices would not go to district courts) 
Louisiana Purchase (loose constructionist didn’t give president power to buy land)
Party organization and communication
President as defender of freedom, liberty
Common man rhetoric
Reduction of  military forces
Less expensive
Doesn’t want fed gov to have that much military authority
Empire of liberty 
Territorial expansion, empire of Liberty
Exploration and since
He is an enlightenment thinker 
L + C mission was pretty scientific

Jefferson acts like a Federalist and a Republican







James Madison
Wrote bill of rights and a lot of constitution
Wrote some of federalist papers

REVOLUTIONARY TERMS
Virtual representation -  response to first continental congress; British idea that american colonies, although they had no actual representative in parliament, were virtually represented by all members of parliament
Significance: virtual representation did not fly in the colonies and it would eventually lead to the war of independence

Loyalists - colonists who remained loyal to GB during war of independence. Could have still fought for US or on British side. Maybe just did not think breaking from GB was the right move. 20-25% of US population mainly in NY PA GA were exiled after the war.


Anti-Federalists - opponents of constitution who saw it as a limitation of their rights. Their demands lead to the addition of the bill of rights ex) Madison, Jefferson
Significance: no more anti federalists after the passage of the constitution; lead to Bill of Rights

Federalism - believed in a system of government which power is divided between central and state governments
A bit different from federalists
This is power separation

Federalists
One of first political parties in US led by Hamilton
Believed in strong central government
Pro washington
Agreed with hamilton’s plan and ties with Britain
Supporters: merchants, farmers, lawyers, political leaders
Elites

Democratic-Republican 
Another first political party led by Jefferson and Madison
Encouraged more state rights and less central gov
opponents of many of washington’s policies
Supported french rev
Supported by rural farmers 

“Republican Motherhood” - ideology that emerged as a result of American independence where woman played an role in shaping american character by being mothers and teachers to their sons through whom they could influence the country. Still couldn't vote and own property though
Significance: acknowledgement that women are an important part of society

Homespun virtue - america creates domestic goods to stop relying on British imports.
Significance: women played large role



INDEPENDENCE
Opinions on independence
Yay
South
annoyed by Lord Dunmore’s proclamation (freedom to any slave who escaped to his lines and bore arms for the king)
Massachusetts
Hurt most by intolerable acts
Virginia and mass elites felt they could govern themselves
Nay (loyalists)
Pride in British empire
Feared that leaving would cause more conflict in the colonies
Neutral
Mass
Pennsylvania

Articles of Confederation (1781-1788) - first frame of government for the US that provided weak central authority and was soon replaced by the constitution
Significance: gave base for rest of US documents; successfully won Rev. war, northwest ordiance

Constitution
ratified 1788

Great Compromise(1787)
Compromise between virginia plan and new jersey plan
	Virginia
Reps based on population
Largest population states favored this plan
	New Jersey
All states get same amount of votes
Small states like this plan

	Agreement
Two house government
House of reps
Reps based on population
Elected directly by people
Two year terms
Senate
Same reps for each state
Elected by state legislatures
6 year terms
⅗ compromise
⅗ of slave population counted toward population of state
Slavery would not be banned until 1808


Federalist Papers (1787-1788) - 85 essays written by hamilton, james madison, john jay published in the New York press under the pseudonym “publius” that supported ratification of the constitution. Included ideas of separation of power.
Significance: huge part in getting the constitution ratified.

Election of 1800 - aka Revolution of 1800. Jefferson beats Burr. Significance: marks the first time there is a peaceful transfer of power from one party (Federalist Adams) to another (Democratic Jefferson). First time a non-federalist is President. Beginning of Democratic streak of rule.

PERIOD 4:
Aaron Burr - 
Lawyer and Democratic Republican who ran against Jefferson in 1800 but was the runner up making him vice president. Famous for killing Hamilton in a duel in 1804.

Barbary Wars (1801-1815) - under Jefferson, US refuses to keep paying tribute to the piratical rulers of certain African states (notably Tripoli). US dispatches naval ships in Mediterranean, turns into naval conflict. Significance: brought end to American practice of paying tribute to pirate states; shows US cannot follow their isolationist principles because are too economically involved internationally. Relates to embargo act because embargo act was similarly caused by pirates (embargo act supposed to protect sailors/ships by getting them off of the water). 

Louisiana Purchase (1803)- Jefferson is concerned about French interference with American commerce especially in New Orleans ports. Jefferson also feared that fighting with the French to get to trade at New Orleans would entangle the US in European affairs. Buys land west of Mississippi from France for $15 million. Significance: allows for western expansion. Jefferson used powers not directly delegated in the constitution. French presence is out of America once and for all. More than doubled the size of the US. Made Democratic-Republican party seem strong - in the eyes of average Americans - so this was another reason for the collapse of Federalists.

Lewis and Clark (expedition: 1804-1806) - Merriweather Lewis and William Clark enlisted by Jefferson to explore Louisiana purchase, establish trading relations with Western Indians, and locate a water route to the Pacific ocean. Significance: strengthened idea that US territory should reach the Pacific, paved way for westward expansion AKA strengthen Manifest Destiny. “Research” done and relationships made makes westward expansion in the future more easier.

Embargo Act (1807) - prompted by GB/France war and their imposition policies; each denied the US from trading with the other nation. Britain also used this time to continue impressing US sailors. So Jefferson prompted congress to ban all US vessels from sailing to foreign ports. Significance: one of first examples of using international trade as a weapon, hindered the US economy greatly, resulted in smuggling, example of Jeffeson presidency failure. 

Hartford Convention (1814) - meeting of 26 New England Federalists in Hartford CT - after War of 1812 - to discuss grievances (wanted to eliminate ⅗ clause, require ⅔ vote to admit to admit new states, thought War of 1812 was terrible idea). Significance: lead to demolition of Federalist party because after Jackson won War of 1812, Federalists were seen as unpatriotic/elitist for opposing it. 

Henry Clay - Whig supported John Quincy Adams, enemy of Jackson, made the American system in 1815, when he was speaker of the house, made a corrupt bargain with John Quincy Adams and became secretary of state. Significance: major role in the making of the American System after spur of nationalism after War of 1812 + America. Believed that through guidance by the Federal government, the US could have large economic growth.
Missouri compromise

American System (devised 1824)  - Economic system devised following the war of 1812 by Whigs party, most importantly, Henry Clay. Note, the idea of a strong federal government is very present as these changes all require legislation.
American System:
New national bank
Tariff on imported manufactured goods (to protect US industry) 
Federal financing of improved roads/canals
People thought was too loose constructionist
Significance:
Intended to make most of Louisiana purchase
Tried to Unite US as a country
Didn’t take into account certain southern ideas so made south angry-ish 
At first, South did not mind the Tariff of 1816, thinking that they could use it to make their own manufacturing base in the South, but once it didn't work, they heavily despised the tariff as it only helped the North

John Calhoun - democrat; leader of warhawk faction, defender of states rights; eventually becomes Whig.  Significance: came up with nullification, essentially leading to Nullification Crisis. 

War Hawks - members of congress who put pressure on Madison to enter war of 1812
Significance: against federalists at hartford treaty, must have convinced Madison, pushed for War of 1812; Henry Clay, Madison, Calhoun 

Treaty of Ghent (1814) - between US and Britain, ended war of 1812, conquered territory had to be returned. Significance: still didn't’ really do anything in terms of fixing impressment/shipping rights. 

Battle of New Orleans (1815) - Note, after Treaty of Ghent but didn't know. The British tried to seize New Orleans during the war of 1812, but failed. US troops defeat big British forces. Makes Jackson seem like a big war hero since he “defeated” the British, causing the treaty. Significance: final battle in War of 1812, leads to star spangled banner. Jackson becomes more of a military/national hero

John Marshall (chief justice 1801 - 1835) - An initially Federalist Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. Appointed by Washington. Defined the roles of the Supreme Court in American government. Even judges who were not federalist, like democratic-republicans sided with Marshall during many rulings because the Constitution was believed to have created a strong Federal Government. Significance: 4 major court cases, Marbury v. Madison, Fletcher v. Peck, McCulloch v. Maryland, Gibbons v. Ogden. Check the slide show for info.

Market Revolution (1820s/1830s) - period of US history where there was widespread mechanization, expansion, and integration of more domestic/foreign markets. Significance: went hand in hand with western expansion. Created cotton gin in turn creating cotton kingdom and contributing to slavery. The US becomes more involved in foreign affairs. Sectionalism promoted. 

Erie Canal (1825) - provides a direct water route from NYC to the midwest. Significance: 18demonstrates American system; demonstrates market revolution

Eli Whitney (invents Cotton Gin in 1794) - Yale graduate working in Georgia invented the cotton gin. Significance: Although no intended to, the cotton gin revolutionize slavery. Cotton had been a dying crop due to labor intensive processes, but now that it could be separated more easily, it spread to make the Cotton Kingdom7. Slave trade re-opened, and Americans wanted to expand more, especiallyin the South.

Tecumseh - brother of Tenskwatawa, from Ohio. Preached that white people were sources of evil in the world, refused negotiations , didn’t support making treaties with the US or giving land away. Organized native American confederacy. Significance: . Refused to sign treaty of Greenville in 1795; rumors that Britain was aiding him contributed to the cause of war of 1812. 


Era of Good Feelings (1815 - 1825) - Monroe’s 2 terms in office were called the Era of Good Feelings. This is due to an absence of 2-party competition → politics organized along sectional interests.

Panic of 1819 - The National Bank and banks relationship (not how it is now) was that banks could print as much money as they wanted, making the value of the currency be unknown. But the National Bank could always request in the form of gold/silver the amount of money they gave out. The problem was that the National Bank did a very poor job of regulating the value of currency. Significance: Resummed trade with Europe + end of war lead to a lot of expansion Westward. There was a lot of speculation on the land. Once trade with Europe slowed down, the economic bubble burst, causing speculators to lose a lot of money. Then, the National Bank requested gold/silver payment from the banks, causing many people to declare bankruptcy since they could not pay for their loans. Unemployment skyrocketed in eastern cities.

Lowell System- Early 19th century system of labor and production of textiles during the rise of textiles in the US. Starts in Massachusetts. Unmarried women live in dormitories, get educated, get meals, church → just to work a lot in factories. Significance: Proto-industrialization aka beginning of industrial revolution spreading to america. Women’s rights. Market Revolution.

Monroe Doctrine (1823) - Drafted by John Quincy Adams, it claimed 3 principles.
U.S. would oppose any further efforts at colonization by European powers in Americas
U.S. would not interfere with wars in Europe
U.S. does not want European powers interfering with new, independent states in Latin America
Significance: Although not legislation, this became a cornerstone of American foreign diplomacy. Adams hoped this would not only help America politically, but also economically as it was a new market.

Missouri Compromise (1820)- Missouri wanted to enter the Union as a state → needed a constitution. Members in congress debated for a while before Senator Jesse Thomas of Illinois’s proposal.
Missouri would be authorized to draft a constitution Tallmadge’s restriction (Tallmadge, Republican, wanted slaves to be prohibited, and children of slaves to be freed at age 25)
Maine, which prohibited slavery, would be added to Union to preserve balance between slave and non-slave states
Slavery prohibited in allr emaining territoiries within Louisianca Purchase north of 36O30’.

John Quincy Adams- National Republican, wrote Monroe Doctrine as his Secretary of State; big abolitionist. One of the founders of the National Republican party. Presidency = underwhelming. Negotiated deal that took florida from spain

Andrew Jackson-
Aka old hickory
President 1829-1837 from SC (associated with TN). Before becoming president was very accomplished in the military and famous after winning the battle of New Orleans and the war of 1812. He was a dynamic, charismatic, volatile democrat with a temper. Beliefs: pro taking Indian land and pro slavery. Negative on market rev. Believed in more power for the states. believed not only elites should hold government positions. Spoils System. Hero of Common man. Nationalist. But his political ideology was not consistent.
King Jackson
Force bill
Veto of second national bank (vetoed a alot)



Spoils System - Introduced by Jackson, it made loyalty to a party the main qualification to gain simple government positions, like postmaster or customs official. Jackson wanted to make political positions open to the people, not just the wealthy.

Indian Removal Act (1830) - law made under Jackson administration; authorized the president to grant lands west of Mississippi in return for Indian lands within existing state borders. Significance: paved the way for the trail of tears. 

Trail of Tears (1830-1850)- movement by Jackson displacing around 60,000 Indians of the Five Civilized Tribes and moving them westward (aka Indian removal). Significance: Big step toward harsh and unfair treatment of Indians


Tariff of Abominations (1828) - raised taxes on imported manufactured goods and raw materials like iron. Significance: south thought was disproportionately affecting them since they did a lot of importing. Led to nullification crisis and Calhoun ideology. 

Nullification Crisis (1832) - conflict between South Carolina and the Federal government during the Jackson presidency. South Carolina believes that they can nullify the Tariff of Abominations which they believe is unconstitutional. Significance: first solid example of nullification, foreshadowed sectional issues becoming more pronounced. Led to the Force Bill. 

Force Bill (1833) - legislation under Jackson made in reaction to the nullification act. Gives the president power to enforce the collection of import duties if a state fails to comply with federal tariffs. Significance: shows that although Jackson = liberal, he still believes in strong centralized government; allows Jackson to go against nullifiers and collect tariffs of abominations. 

Second Bank of the US (1816-1833)
Controversy
Bank symbolizes hope and fear from market revolution
Effort to centralize banking system (take power away from state banks)
Jackson and others distrusted banks because they printed money and stuff
Thought only true currency was in gold and silver
Private institution
Bankers have private interests
Head of bank: nicolas brittle, aristocrat from pennsylvania
Helped create more stable currency and unwilling to back down in fight with Jackson
Jackson’s veto 1832
Bank’s charter expired in 1836, but tried to convinced congress to extend for 20 years
Jackson vetoed against favorable odds
Knew vetoing could pose risk to re election but did it anyway
Jackson veto bank recharter important part of presidency
Second re election (beat clay) ensured fall of bank of US
Big hit for clay and bittle


Denmark Vesey- Black American leader who was accused of planning a slave revolt that would take place July 14 1822. So he was executed on July 2. Significance: Slave revolts taken seriously and were a major offense

Nat Turner’s Rebellion (1831) - Leader Nat Turner: Famous slave rebel, preacher, religious mystic from virginia. North Carolina.  Nat and others went from plantation to plantation assaulting white plantation owners and their families, mostly women and children. By the time it ended 80 slaves joined and 60 whites killed. “Successful” because it started with fewer people and grew so less chance of a snitch than other revolts like vesey or gabriel. Result was that Nat and others were executed. Significance: Last large rebellion before civil war; showed North that no inside force was going to defeat South, had to step in.  Caused panic among southern owners which made the legislature more strict toward all blacks.
No black preachers (couldn't enforce)
Strengthened militia force in south
No blacks could own firearms
No slaves could be taught how to read

William Lloyd Garrison- American Christian, journalist, abolitionist, suffragist, and local reformer. Had an abolitionist paper: The liberator. Accused constitution of being pro slavery
Significance: ADD started american anti-slavery society

Whigs- held pretty much the same beliefs as the national republicans, but emphasized being against Jackson. Important figures: Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, William Seward

Martin Van Buren- 8th president (1837-1841). Under his presidency the country faced economic depression. Served as secretary of state and vice president to Andrew jackson. (different terms of jackson presidency) Not really sure why he was that important to Unit 4
Significance: Invented Democratic party with Jackson

Seneca Falls Convention (1848) - women’s rights convention in Seneca Falls, NY. Led by Susan B Anthony and Elizabeth Stanton who declared men and women equal. Made goals of achieving equal voting, legal, and property rights. Overshadowed by anti alvery movement. Significance: first women’s rights convention. Declaration of sentiments (plagerism of declaration of independence)

Second Great Awakening (1795 - 1835) - 
Reaction to market revolution and US’s supposed increased materialism
Group of popular religious revivals
Hell in vivid language
Self improvement/reliance/determination
Communal effort
Christianity becomes more central to US culture
Promoted free will/possibility of salvation for all
Controlled individualism promoted
Industry, sobriety, self-discipline


War of 1812: 
Causes
Event Specifics
Effects
Napoleonic Wars cause sanctions by Brits
Losing a lot of money
Brits are annoying and do impressment
Brits do not leave even though they are supposed to
British helping Tecumseh and other Native efforts
War hawks do not enjoy that
Also want to invade Canada
Think thesis will help with Canada
1812-1814
US vs. British (and Brits Native allies) 
Brits also occupied with Napolean
DC (burned capitol), New Orleans
James Madison
Andrew Jackson (helps in Battle of New Orleans
Ends in Treaty of Ghent
US “wins” but don’t get anything 
Still referred to 2nd war for independence
Proven ability of republican government to conduct war something successfully
Weakens Federalists
Andrew Jackson was national hero for new orleans victory
A. Jax comes out. 	
Complete conquest of east of mississippi
Settlers rapidly moved to that area (Indiana, Michigan, Alabama, Mississippi)
Solidified border between Canada and US
Canadian Tension
Showed weakness of American transportation systems and need for national bank for stable currency



John Marshall Court Cases
Federal gov became more powerful (Marshall federalist)
State governments become less powerful
Marbury vs. Madison(1803):
Specifics: 
Right before Jefferson was supposed to be inaugurated, Adams appoints to justices to supreme court (known as midnight judges)
Judiciary Act of 1801 -- reduced number of justices, creates lower districts, increased federal  power
Jefferson does not agree with Adams, does not trust courts, does not like that Adams is appointing too many judges
Marshall (Federalist) -- declares that Supreme Court cannot force Madison to give Marbury's commission because do not have power to do this
 Effects: 
Judicial Review
Supreme court can declare laws unconstitutional


Fletcher vs. Peck (1810):
Marshall court
Georgia legislature land grants rife with corruption, later legislature is repealed in the grants
Marshall court said state legislature couldn’t do that 
Sanctity of contracts (once a contract is signed it can’t just be broken)

McCulloh vs. Maryland (1819):
Specifics:
Issued was whether Second National Bank was constitutional
Marshall declared that it was proper due to the elastic clause/loose constructionism
Distrust in banks started because of Panic of 1819
Maryland put a tax on the second national bank, McCulloh refuses to play Maryaln;s tax
Rules that Maryland couldn’t tax bank
Effects:
Marshall’s decision expanded power of federal government
Elastic Clause gives Congress powers that weren't specifically outlined in Constitution


Dartmouth College vs. Woodward(1819):
Background:  
Dartmouth got original charter from England in 1769
After War of Independence was controlled by a board of federalist trustees
Problem
Democratic Republicans in New Hampshire legislature try to make the school a public institution (partly because of its differing ideals)
Woodward is made the new secretary and treasurer of college
Does the state have the power to change the contract without the consent of parties? 
Ruling
State court says that state has the power to change a contract
Marshall’s Supreme Court says it’s a violation of Contract Clause
Significance: 
- Made an important constitutional limit on state’s authority to intervene and change state charters and contracts
- Strengthens Contract Clause and encourages economic growth
- Shows protection that private institutions get 
- Free enterprise system

Gibbons vs. Ogden (1824):
Specifics/Background:
State of NY gave certain individuals (Ogden) to operate steamboats in its waters
Gibbons gets same right given to him but by federal government
Ogden sues Gibbons over it
Issue: issue was if Congress’s power to give license overruled the power of NY state. If it can, can a state interfere with congress to regulate congress? 
Can congress regulate interstate commerce? (inside states)
Effects:
All 6 judges rule in favor of Gibbons
Shows Marshall’s federalist vision again
Regulation of navigation for the purpose of managing interstate commerce is a power only given to federal government

Worcester vs. Georgia(1832):
Specifics/background: 
Georgia law said that Non-native americans (like Worcester) couldn’t live on native american land
Worcester lived on Cherokee land, but said that Georgia couldn’t make decisions about native land because it was the cherokees
Effects:
Question in determining legal status of native american tribes
Rules that only federal government can make treaties with/pass legislation that affects native tribes

PERIOD 5:
Historical Vocabulary:
Mexican American War (1846-1848)

Causes:
Event Specifics:
Effects:
Manifest density 
Desire to annex Cali
Polk being elected
He did that
The Texas Question
Should it be part of the US?
Everyone just ignores this
Marbury vs. Madison
Party Politics
King Cotton
Monroe Doctrine
US oversees whats best for this hemisphere
Latin American Revolutions
1846-1848
Mexico/US
Most of the fighting occurred in central Mexico
Taylor’s army defeated Sntana Anna’s army at the battle of Buena Vista
Mexico still refused to negotiate so americans moved toward mexico and occupied city
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
Treaty of GH
Confirms annexation of Texas
US gets CA/NM/AZ/NV/UT (mexican cession) 
The Mexican border divides families/trading routes/etc.
Civil war
All this new land, how to divide into free/slave states
Can’t just keep ignoring the dysfunction of the US government
Debate of if the US can just declare war for no reason
Transcontinental Railroad
Gold Rush (bc we got Cali)
War “beta test”
Bad relationship of Mexico
Moral Debate about War



Causes
President Polk sent someone to try to negotiate a deal for the US to get CA and negotiate texas - mexico border
While waiting for response sent troops under Taylor to the border and mexican militia killed some
Polk saw as reason to declare war (passed through congress)
War began
Battles
Alamo
Aftermath:
Issue of with all this land, what will be free/slave states
Can’t keep ignoring dysfunction of US government in choosing states, something needs to change

Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848) - end of mexican american war. Mexcio recongnized rio grande as southern border of texas. US took possession of California and New Mexico and the US paid Mexico $15 million.

The Texas Question -
Wilmot Proviso (1846) - PA congressman David Wilmot proposes resolution that prohibits slavery in all of Mexico. Significance: passed in house, but not senate: shows that government can’t agree on anything. Shows Mexican territory is the end of avoiding slavery question. Helped lead to Civil War; party lines crumble; sexual tension!

Free Soil Party (formed in 1848) - party formed by opponents of slavery’s expansion. Sifnificance: supported by Van Buren, anti-expansion of slavery; the fact that anti-slaveryexpansion was supported by respectable men helped it be more appealing; eventually merge with Republican party

Compromise of 1850 - plan by Henry Clay, devised when California wanted to be admitted to union as a free state, but Southerners were scared to upset balance:
California can enter union as a free state
Slave trade (but not slavery itself) abolished in capital (DC)
Fugitive slave act = reaffirmed
Status of slavery in new areas acquired from Mexico woul dbe left ot decision of local white inhabitants
US would pay off massive debt that Texas has accumulated while it was independent
Significance: preserved balance between free/slave states, leads to the Great Debate, shows delicacy of Union

Fugitive Slave Act (1850) - allows special federal commissioners determine the fate of “fugitive” slaves with no trial by jury/testimony; prohibits local authorities from capturing fugitive slaves. Significance: shows that South cares mroe about preserving slavery than actual states rights (they want commissioners to cross borders and physically get back slaves), widens sectional divisions

Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854) - plan by Douglas which allowed the new territories of Kansas/Nebraska to decide if they wanted to be free territories/slave territories for themselves. Significance: repeals part of Missouri Compromise that says everything above 36’30 is free; shatters unity of democratic party. Contributes to sectionalism- as parties become more based upon slavery, sectionalism follows. 


Bleeding Kansas (1854) - caused by hundreds of pro-slavery voters crossing Missouri border and submitting fraudulent ballots in Kansas election. Because of popular sovereignty, they wanted to sway Kansas’s designation as free/slave state in their favor. Resulting proslavery legislature deemed legal. Mini-civil war breaks out in canvas. Significance: result of Kansas-Nebraska Act; foreshadows Civil war. Shows that popular sovereignty is not going to work. 

Popular Sovereignty - Stephen Douglas’s idea; idea that residents of a territory, and not the federal government, should be allowed to decided on slavery within their borders. Significance: idea put into affect in Kansas-Nebraska Act

Republican Party- formed in 1854 as a reaction to the kansas- nebraska act. eventually concentrated in the north. Anti slavery but different sections of the party had different reasons to be anti slavery. (morals, to win war, poltical)
	Radical Republicans- party represented in congress. Harsh toward confederate states rejoining the union. At first like Johnson because he was also initially harsh toward those states, but eventually began to fight with him a ton. for black rights, labor unions, women’s suffrage
	Former Know-nothing party members - 
	Abolitionists
	Free soilers
Conscience whigs (anti slavery whigs)



Dred Scott v. Sanford (1857) -
Context:
In the 1830s, slave Scott went to Illinois (where slavery is banned)
returned to Missouri, he sued for freedom claiming that him being on free soil made him free
Head Justice Roger B. Taney
Questions Case Tackles:
Could a black person be a citizen and therefore sue in federal court?
Did residence in a free state make Scott free?
Did Congress possess the power to prohibit slavery in a territory?
Verdicts:
Scott is still a slave
Only whites can be citizens
Congress has no power to outlaw slavery
The Republican idea to restirct the expansion of slavery is unconstitutional
Aftermath:
Eliminates all avenues of peaceful resolution to the slavery issue
Big step towards secession crisis
North distrusts Supreme Court
Puts question of black citizenship on national political agenda
Ohio’s legislature -- makes anyone regardless of race born there a citizen
Douglass forms alliance with Repubs to block attempt to admit Kansas as a slave state without a popular vote (now Dems distrust him)

Lincoln-Douglas Debates (1858) - debates held in seven Illionis time between Lincoln (believes freedom means opposition of slavery), Senator Stephen Douglas (freedom means self-determination, the Dred Scott decision is compatible with popular sovereignty, politicians hae no right to impose their moral standards on society). Significance: shows division between North/South even within a single state. Shows core events of the time. 

John Brown (dies in 1859) - did seizure of Harper's Ferry/murdered pro-slavery settlements. Significance: Brown became a martyr for the Norht, South sees him as a terrorist. Heightens sectional tension. 


Abraham Lincoln - republican, elected in 1860 (first Republican president), made emancipation Proclamation, commander in Chief of Union forces during Civil war, participated in Lincoln-Douglas Debates. 

Secession Crisis(1860 - 1861) - withdrawal of 11 slave states from Union after Lincoln’s Election

Causes:
Specifics
Effects
Southern: 
South was not getting enough benefit from cotton ($ going to North)
South wanted to expand southward, North did not
SC leaves
Actual:
Mex/US war
New land which heightened tension
Market Revolution/Manifest Destiny (heightedned sectoonalism)
Bleeding Kansas/Lincoln Douglas Debates
Show division
Lincoln election
Conceptual:
Virginia/Kentucky Resolutions
Alien+sedition acts are bs
Hartford Convention
Let’s leave we don’t want WO1812
Nullification Crisis
Tariff is stupid we’re not following




11 slave states withdrwa from Union the second lincy gets elected
Civil war. 



Fort Sumter (1861) - South Carolina, Jefferson Davis (confederacy) orders batteries to be fired at fort. Significance: first battle of civil war, South wins. 

Andersonville/ Camp sumter(1864-end of civil war)- Georgia,  largest and most famous military prison of the civil war. Under confederate control, 45,000 union soldiers imprisoned there and 13,000 died. Really brutal but not talked about much

Sea Islands Experiment (started 1861) Most famous rehearsal for re construction on sea islands just off the coast of south carolina occupied by union navy. White population fled and lef 10,000 slaves behind. Community focused on education, working for wages, good shelter. By 1865 experiment was deemed successful. Left question: Should black freedom mean ownership of land?


Confederate States of America - collection of 11 states that seceded from the US immediately following the election of 1860. Lead by Jefferson Davis. Context: South in civil war
	Beliefs:
Pro-slavery
Pro-states rights

Jefferson Davis- Democrat - President of the confederate states of america from 1861-1865. Represented Mississippi in senate and house of reps before the civil war. Resigned spot in congress to serve in Mexican - American war and is credited with winning the battle of bueno vista.

Emancipation Proclamation (1863) - document that frees all slaves in states rebelling against the Union. Contains no reference to compensation of slaveholders/the colonization of freed people. Commits the US government to enlisting Black soldiers. Significance: officially identified slavery as a war cause; Civil War now represents far-reaching transformation that will transform post-war Union. 
	Pros of issuing:
Emancipated slaves can help fight fo rUnion
Britain will be less inclined to support Confederacy (Britain traded with Confederacy)
Change the public opinion of North
	Cons of issuing:
Makes the North seem desperate
Border states may secede
More motivation for people in south to fight against Union
More people are pro-slavery YAY then pro-states-rights YAY
Could harm economy
Doesn’t even free that many slaves


Proclamation of Amnesty and Reconstruction (1863) - Lincoln plan for Reconstruction: never instated
Full presidential pardons would be granted to Confederates who took anoath to the Union/Constituiton and emancipated their slaves. 
10% Bill
Southern states readmitted encouraged to enact plans to deal with ex-slaves and not compromise their freedom
Significance: not harsh, Radical republicans disagree.

Ten Percent Plan (1863)- Announced by Lincoln to pursue after war but he died and the plan was never carried out- Restoration of rights, including property except for slaves, to nearly all white southerners who took an oath affirming loyalty to the Union and support for emancipation. When 10 percent of the voters of 1860 had taken the oath, they could elect a new state government, which would be required to abolish slavery. Goals: Weaken confederacy and shorten and end war


Battle of Gettysburg (1863) - isolated tactical engagement in PA. Confederacy on offense. General Robert E. Lee attacks center of Union line (he is going against Meade, Union forces commander). 50,000 casualties. Significance: turning point. Confederate forces never went on offensive again after this, General Lee loses his sense of invincibility. 

Battle of Vicksburg (1863) - siege in Mississippi. Union general Ulysses S. Grant vs. Confederate pemberton. Siege that controlled the Mississippi river and cut of LA, Ark, TX. Significance: major turning point in western front. Followed by Sherman’s march to the sea. Gives Union control of Mississippi River valley. 

Sherman’s March to the Sea (1864) - destructive military march corse to the sea from atlanta, destroyed lots of southern infrastructure (led to end of war) increased Union morale
 

Robert E. Lee - Commander of the confederate army during the civil war and symbol of American south. Also fought in revolutionary war.

Ulysses S. Grant - Civil War hero and 18th president. 4th and final commanding Union general in civil war and general for the battle of Vicksburg. Seen as national hero after civil war which led him to become president. Bad presidency. Worked on reconstruction and acceptance of freedmen
 
Wade- Davis Bill (1864) - Named after two leading Republican members of Congress. Required a majority (as opposed to 1/10th) of white male southerners to pledge support for the Union before Reconstruction could begin in any state. Guaranteed blacks equality before the law (not the right to vote) and passed Congress but Lincoln refused to sign it. 


13th Amendment(1865) - Abolished slavery throughout the entire Union. Significance: Introduced “slavery” to the constitution, Freed 4 million slaves

Appomattox Courthouse - In Virginia where Lee surrendered for the confederate states on April 9, 1865. Significance: end of civil war

Freedmen’s Bureau - (1865), Congress passed An Act the freedman’s bureau which would provide food, shelter, clothing, medical services, and land to displaced Southerners, including newly freed slaves

Sharecropping -  landlord provided seed and farm supplies in return for share (normally 1/2) of harvest
Became like slavery, was originally maybe helpful for freed blacks but eventually became way for plantation owners to get around abolishment of slavery

Andrew Johnson - Democrat from Tennessee. Lincoln’s vice president, ran with him to gain votes of democrats supporting the union. Ended up being president when lincoln died. Beliefs: Racist, against emancipation, for togetherness of union. Embodied Andrew Jackson. Vetoed 23 bills in presidency (alot) and argued with republicans in congress a lot and very hostile toward confederates at first (said All former leaders of confederacy and people with more than $20,000 in taxable property couldn’t vote or hold office) but pardoned basically anyone. Impeached (violated Tenure of Office Act) : Charged with 11 high crimes, frist impeached president, senate needed one more vote to reach ⅔ and remove him from office


Reconstruction Act(1867) - Written by radical republicans in congress and outlined terms for readmission to the union for confederate states. Divided confederate states except for Tennessee into 5 military districts. Enacted by congress who overruled President Johnson’s veto. States had to ratify the 14th amendment

Black Codes (first Black Codes enacted in 1865) - Blacks couldn’t rent land or borrow money to buy land, couldn't testify against whites in court, had to sign work agreements (forced labor) Significance: the south trying to limit freedom of Blacks

Presidential Reconstruction -  reconstruction acts done by a President: done by Johnson/Lincoln

Presidential Reconstruction:
Lincoln: 
10% plan (Lincoln)
Calm because wants to just get the Union together
South not suffering enough!
Proclamation of Amnesty and Reconstruction (1863)
Freedman’s Bureau (had idea before he died) 
Johnson:
All former leaders of confederacy/ex-confederates with more than $20,000 in taxable property can’t vote/hold office
“Pardon” Policy
Ex-confederates cannot vote/be he pardons them
He is not going to say no to anybody
He is tough talk but it’s just as easy to get back into Union
Grant:
Amnesty Act of 1872
Repeals disqualification of voting for Confederates






Radical Reconstruction - radical republicans took over reconstruction from the Johnson
Political success and social failure

Congressional Reconstruction: (radical reconstruction = a phase of this) 
Radical:
Reconstruction Acts of 1867
Johnson is impeached
1 vote away from being removed from office
No president has actually ever been removed from Office for impeachment
Just Congressional Reconstruction:
13, 14, 15 	Amendments
Wade-Davis Bill (50% bill)
Civil Rights Act (1866)
Vetoed by Johnson


Civil Rights Acts (1866) passed by congress but vetoed by johnson. Said all citizens are equal under law. Johnson vetoes. Precursor to to the 14th amendment


= ratify 14th
Blacks vite
Remove coneds
Tenure of Office Act (1867)  - passed by Radical Republicans in Congress. States that a President cannot remove members of his cabinet without consent from the senate. Significance: Johnson goes against this act firing a member of his cabinet and is impeached. 

14th Amendment (1868) - grants citizens to blacks (naturalized/born in the US). Confederates cannot be political leaders in federal/state offices. Federal government will not pay off Confederate debt/ex-slave owner debt. Discredits dred Scott, establishes due process, life-liberty/property for blacks. Significance: a reconstruction amendment, shows more rights for blacks, against blakc codes

15th Amendment (1870)  - Secured voting rights for Blacks by not letting states stop anyone from voting for “race, color, or previous condition of servitude”
In election of 1868 grant would not have won if not fo black votes
So republican controlled gov wanted to ensure their right to vote in future elections

Ku Klux Klan - Founded in 1867 by Nathaniel Bedford Forrest organzied to intimidate freed slaves and white reformers. Destroyed black property and killed many. 

Enforcement Acts (1870-1871) - series of acts passed by radical republicans in congress that allowed enforcement of the 13,14,15 amendments Significance: protect balck rights to vote, hold office, server on juries, receive equal protection of laws. 

Amnesty Act of 1872 - passed by President Grant, ended office-holding disqualifications against most ex-confederate leaders. Significance: literally 20 years after Reconstruction these racist leaders were in positions to be leaders in their states, and enact racist laws.

Bargain of 1877 - Democrats would allow Hayes to become president after an extremely close vote. In return republicans would end support of republican reconstruction troops in the south and support building of southern continental railroad

Carpet Baggers: a political candidate who seeks election in an area where they have no local connections

Presidential Elections of Period 5: 
Important elections: 1860, 1844 kinda, 1876
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1O7BtqDMofRdp4EQsTEuTZrw7cpSHs8nUvP6iDgivY2I/edit

Civil War
Causes
Slavery question 
Balance of free and slave states in senate
Mexican american war
Bleeding kansas


Union/ USA
Confederacy
All advantages 
Population
Industrialization
Manufacturing
Weaponry

Has to “invade” south (technical challenge)

Federal funding (currency, income tax)
Imbalance economy, lower population

All the fighting in south, south west

Hoping to court foreign governments (GB)

Weak central government





