Caesar: De Bello Gallico1.1 (lines 1-14)	      Gaul is as a whole divided into three parts, of which the Belgians inhabit one, the Aquitani another, those who are called Celts in the language of themselves, Gauls in ours, [inhabit] the third. All these differ among themselves in language, in customs, in laws. The river Garonne divides the Gauls from the Aquitanis, the Marne and the Seine divide them from the Belgians. Of all these, the Belgians are the bravest/mightiest, because they are the farthest from the civilization and the culture of the province, and merchants least often resort to them and import those things which pertain to the weakening of courage, and are next to the Germans who dwell across the Rhine, with whom they waged war continually. For which reasons, the Helvitians also surpass the remaining Gauls in courage because they contend with the Germans in almost daily battles, when they either keep them from their own territory or themselves wage war in their territory. Syntax:Omnis - adverbial Qui - generic (ei qui) Partes - antecedent of quarum quarum - partitive genitivelingu? - ablative means Galli & Celtae - predicative nom.Lingua, institutis, legibus - abl respect Gallos - accusative pl. Direct objectPropterea quod - Caesarian pleonasm“The province” - connects Italy and Spain *1.1.15-1.2.7Of these one part which it has been said the Gauls posses takes its beginning from the river Rhone, is bounded by the Garonne river, by the ocean, by the Belgian’s territories, and also reaches to the Rhine from the Sequanni and the Helvetii, faces the north. The Belgae arise from the farthest borders of Gaul, they extend to the lower part of the river Rhine, they face towards the Northeast [They face into the North and the rising Sun]. Aquatania extends from the river Garonne to the Pyrenees Mountains and to that part of the ocean which is near Spain; it faces Northwest [It faces between the setting sun and the North].Eorum = partitive GenFlumine Rodeo = abl place from whichAsyndeton in many placesExtremis - finibus = HyperbatonExpressions of directions = HendiadysSynecdoche is like 5000 heads (for cows)(type of Metonymy)Dictum est= verb of the headAmong the Helvitians, Oregetorix was by far the most famous and richest. He, with Marcus Valerius Messala and Marcus Pupius Piso Calpurnianus (being) the consuls, led by desire for rule, made a plot of the nobility and persuaded the citizenry (that they leave from their territories) with all their resources: [Saying that] it would be very easy, since they surpassed all in courage to obtain dominion of all Gaul. He more easily persuaded them of this because of this because the Helvetians are confined on all sides by the nature of the place:Hoc…quod - Because..Because: Caesarian PleonasmId = Of thisConsulibus = predicate ablativeUt = indirect commandNobilissimus + ditissimus = superlative adjectiveLonge = ablative degree of differenceM…cosilibus = AARegni = objective genCupiditate = abl meansNobilitatis = objective genitiveCivitati = dative with intransitive verbsDe finibus = abl separationCum clause = causalPerfacile = virtual superlativePotiri = subject accusativeOmnibus = dat. Comp. Virtute = abl. RespectTotius Galliae = objective genitiveImperio = abl. With sundry verbsId = cognate - internal accQuod = Caesarean pleonasmFacilius = comparative adverbeis= date with intransitive verbsnatura= means1.2.7-18, 1.3.1-6On one side, by the very wide and very deep Rhine river, which divides the Helvetian territory from the Germans; on the second side by the very high Jura mountain range, which is between the Sequani and the Helvetians; on the third (side), by Lake Geneva and the river Rhone, which divides our province from the Helvetians. Because of these things it happened that they were both wandering less widely and were able to make war less easily on their neighbors; for this reason as people desirous of warring, they were affected by great pain. Moreover, in consideration of the multitude of their people and in consideration of their reputation for bravery in war [lit., war and bravery], they were thinking that they had narrow borders, which extended 240 miles in length, in breadth, 180. Induced by these things and influenced by the authority of Orgetorix, they decided to prepare those things of the sort which pertained to departing, to buy as great a number as possible of pack animals and of wagons, to make sowings as great as possible in order that on their journey an abundance of corn might be supplied, to establish peace and friendship with the neighboring states.```His rebus = ablative causeFiebat followed by substantive ut clause, ut clause functions as subject of fi?batFluimn? Rh?n? = ablative of meansGermanis line 9 = ablative separation Tertia = tertia ex parteNatur? = ablative means Minus… minus… = comparative adverbs Late, facile = positive adverbsFinitimis = dative of compound verbInferre = compound verb Bellandi = gerund, objective genitive dependent on cupidiMagno dolore = abl. Of meansAdficiebantur = unassimilated/archaicBelli and fortudinis = hendiadys and objective genitives Se = subjective accusativeHabere = infinitive in indirect discourseAngustos fines = direct object of habere Arbritrabantur = intro to indirect statement CCXL and CLXXX = cardinal numbers Pasuum = partitive genitive His rebus = ablative of meansAuctoritate = ablative of meansParallelism in participle phrasesConstituerunt has 4 object infinitives: comparare, facere, suppeteret, confirmare Maximam and maximas = superlative adjectives Quam maximam = as great as possible Iumentorum et carrorum = partitive genitive Frumenti = partitive genitive Proximis civitatibus = abl of accompaniment 1.3.7-24For the purpose of completing these things they deemed that a biennium was enough for them. They declared their departure in the third year by law. For the purposes of completing these things Orgetorix is chosen, he took upon himself an embassy to the states. On this journey he persuades Casticus, the son of Catamantaloedis, a Sequanian whose father had possessed power over the Sequani for many years, and had been called a friend of the Roman people by the senate, that he seize the sovereignty in his own state which his father had held before him; and likewise he persuades Dumnorix the Aeduian, the brother of Diviciacus, who held chief authority within the state at the same time and was especially agreeable to the common people that he attempt the same thing and he gives his daughter to him in marriage. He demonstrates his his to them that to complete the things having been tried is very easy to do because he himself was going to hold power over his own state: (saying that) it was not doubtful that the helvetians were the most powerful of all Gaul; he declares that he, with his own resources and his army, will secure kingdoms for them. Induced by this speech they give a pledge and an oath among themselves and hope that with sovereignty having been seized they will be able to get possession of all Gaul through the three most powerful and strongest nations/tribes.  Conficiendas: gerundiveBiennium: subj acc indirect statementEsse = infinitive in indirect statementSatis = predicate adjective Lege: abl of meansConficiendas: gerundiveDeligitur: 3rd sing pres ind passCastico: dative of intransitive verbFilio: dat. Apositive Multos annos: accusative duration of timeObtinuerat: 3rd singular pluperfect indicative activeSenatu: abl of agentAmicus = predicate nominativeUt- occuparet: indirect command governed by persuaditJuicy hyperbaton right there Regnum: antecedent of quod dumnorigi : dat. Intransitive verb Aeudo, fratri: dat. Appositive Chiasmus with persuaditEo tempore: abl time when Maxime: superlative adverbAcceptus and maxime: hyperbatonUt idem coniuretur: indirect commandSuam: orgetorix Ei: dumnorix Perfacile: virtual superlativeFactu: suppine Illis: dat ioConata: substantive use of the participlePerficere: subj acc and subj infPropterea quod: Caesarian pleonasmSuae civitatis: obj genobtonturus esset: active periphrasticQuin clause: doubting clause Totius galliae: Partitive genitivtive Plurimum: superl adverbSe: sunj accregnam : d.o Hac oratione ablative of meansTres: cardinal numeralTotius Galliae: genitive with sundry verbs1.4.1-11 - 1.5.1-5This thing was reported to the Helvetians through informersinformation. In accordance with their customs, they forced Orgetorix to plead the case from chains; it was necessary for the punishment to follow the condemned man, that he be burned with fire. On the day having been set up for pleading the case, Orgetorix gathered from everywhere his whole family, about ten thousands of people, for the trial, and assembled all of w dw his clients and debtors, of which he had a great number, thithersame; in order that he might not plead his case, through them he freed himself. While the state, having been urged on, on account of this matter was attempting to enforce its right and the magistrates were rounding up a large group of men from the fields, Orgetorix died; nor is the suspicion absent, as the Helvetians think, that he commited suicide [lit., “he himself resolved on death for himself”].After his death the Helvetii nevertheless try to do the thing which they had decided, that they leave from their territory. As soon as they believed themselves to be prepared for this thing, they burned all of their towns in number about twelve, villages about 400, [and] remaining private buildings. 1.5.5 - 1.6.6They burn up all the grain except that which they were going to carry for themselves; In order that with the hope of returning home having been removed, they might be more ready for the purpose of undergoing all dangers; they order each man to carry out from home for himself flour of three months. They persuade the Rauraci and the Tulingi and the Latobrigi that, employing the same plan, with their towns and villages having been burnt up, they set out together with them, and they received to themselves as allies the Boii, who had dwelt across the Rhine and had passed into the Norican territory and had besieged Noria. There were in all two routes, of the sort by means of which routes they were able to depart from home: one through the Sequani, narrow and difficult, between the Jura mountain range and the river Rhone, hardly of the sort by which individual wagons could be drawn, moreover, a very tall mountain was overhanging, with the result that very few men could easily block the passage [lit., prohibit]Portaturi erant: active periphrasticSpe sublata: ablative absoluteReditionis: objective genitiveDomum: accusative place to which dependent on a noun Paratiores: comp. Adjective, pred. Nom.Ad - subeunda: expresses purpose, subeunda = gerundive Trium mensum: genitive of descriptionDomo: abl place from which and specialty itemRauraci. . . Latabragi = aysndeton dat. Intransitive verb Uti = ut, governs indirect commandUsi = perfect participleConsilio = abl sundry verbsOppidis. . . exustis = ablative absolute Proficiscantur = verb in indirect commandOppugnarant = syncopation, oppugnaverant Itinera = antecedent of quibus Itineribus = polyptoton and attractionDomo = same as aboveVix qua = relative clause of characteristic Vix = prolepsis Altissimus = superlative adjective Facile = adverb Perpauci = virtual superlative Prohibere = complementary infinitive 1.6 (lines 6-16)	The other through our province, more easy and unimpeded , because of this the Rhone river flows between the territories of the Helvetians and the Allobroges who had recently been pacified and it is crossed by a ford in several places. Geneva is the farthest town of the Allobroges and is closest to the territory of the Helvetians. From this town a bridge extends toward the Helvetians. They (Helvetians) were believing that they either would persuade the Allobroges because they did not yet seem to be of a good mind towards the roman people or they would compel (the Allogbroges) by force that they permit them to go through their territory. With all things having been prepared for departure, they appoint a day, in order that on this day they may all assemble on the bank of Rhone. This day was (March 28) [lit. before the fifth day the kalends of April] with Lucius piso, Aulus Gabinius [being] consuls. Multo - abl degree of differenceFacilius adn Propterea quod - caesarian pleonasmNonnullis locis - abl place whereVado- Abl Means/ litotes Finibus - dat w/ adj Indirect discourse like 10-12Esse implied with coacturos and persuarosBono animo - abl description in the predicateut… paterentur - indirect commandEos - HelSous - All. PolypetptonOmnibus…comparatis - abl absoluteQua die - abl time whenConveniant - 3, plu, subj, act - Qua….Conveniant - relative clause of purpose dictated by diemConsilibus - pred ablSyntax:1.7 (lines 1-4)When this had been reported to Caesar that they were trying to make a journey through our province, he hastens to depart from the city and he marches to farther Gaul by extremely forced marches and he arrives in the vicinity of Geneva.Caesari - proleptic - dat i.oInter facere - idiom for “trying to make route”Cum … nunitiatum esset - subjunctive mood in a circumstantial clasueId - antecedent to eos clauseEos - acc subjectEos … conari - indirect statementUlteriorem - comp adjhyperbatonMilitum - part genIn Gallia - abl place whereLine 8 1.7 4-20He orders from the whole province as great a number as he can of soldiers (there was only in farther Gaul one legion), he orders the bridge near Geneva to be cut down. When the Helvetians were made more certain about his arrival, they send legates to him, the most noble of the state, of which embassy Nammeius and Verucloetius were holding the principle place, in order that they might say that they had it in mind to make the journey through the province without any mischief. Because of this because they were having no other route, [adding that] they were asking that it be permitted for them to do this with his permission. Caesar, because he was holding in memory that Lucius Cassius the consul had been slain and his army had been routed away by the Helvetians and had been sent under the yoke, he was not thinking that it should need to be permitted; nor did he think that men of a hostile mind with an opportunity of making the journey through the province having been given would refrain from damage and mischief. Yet in order that a period [of time] might be able to intervene while the soldiers whom he had ordered up were assembling he responds to the legates that he would take time for the purpose of considering: if they wanted anything they should return on the 13th of Aprilday before the ides of April.  Provinciae toti - dat w/ imperoAd- near Maxumum quam - as great as possQui- ut ei (purpose clause)Militum - partitive genitiveUlteriore - comparative adjective Certiores Facti sunt- idon for were informedNobilissimus- superl. Adj. Cuius legationis- relative use = ( attraction) Line 9 - relative clause of purpose (ut ei)Certeriores - pred adjDicerent- verb of the head, introduces indirect discourse Sibi- Dative of possessorFacere - Subject accusative of indirect discourse, subject of essePropterea quod - Caesarian pleonasm Aliud iter = hyperbationRogare- continue Ind. Disc. * Followed by an ind command (UT)Eius voluntate - ablative of accordanceLiceat- impersonal* Subject is facereo D.O of facere - idSibi - dative of referenceCaesar - subjectMemoria tenabat- he was holding in memory, governing Ind. DiscourseLucius Cassium = subject accusative in indierect discourseExcercitum - subject accusative * Subject of pulsum esse/missum esse* Concedendum (short for concedendum esse) - passive periphrastic  Inimico animo- Abl. DescriptionData ? facienda - abl absFaciendi- gerundive modifying itineris Tempuraturos (esse) - active periphrastic Inuria , malficio- abl sep. Ad deliberandum- gerundive of purposese Line 17 - purpose clauseDum - dum clause of anticipated actionLegatis - dative ioSe - subject accusative of sumpturum (with esse implied)sumpturum esse - active periphrasticDiem - do of sumpturumSi - mixed future conditional sentence in indirect discourseDeliberandum- gerundBEGIN CAESAR BOOK IV SELECTIONS4.24.1-25.11But the barbarians, with the plan of the Romans having been learned, with cavalry and charioteers having been sent ahead, which kind they very often are accustomed to use in battles, following closely with their remaining troops, were preventing our men from disembarking from the ships. On account of these causes, there was very great difficulty, because our ships because of their large size were not able to be anchored except in deep water; moreover, by the soldiers in places unknown, their hands having been impeded, oppressed by the great and heavy weight of arms, at the same time it had to be jumped down from the ships, and had to be a standing firm in the waves, and had to be a fighting with the enemy while those men either from dry land or having progressed a little into the water, with all of their limbs being unimpeded, in places very familiar, were boldly throwing spears and urging on well trained horses. Our men, having been very frightened by these things and all together inexperienced in this type of fighting, were not using the same eagerness and zeal which they were accustomed to use in infantry battles. When Caesar noticed this, he ordered the war ships of which both the appearance was more unusual to foreigners and their movement more unimpeded for use, to be moved back a little from the freight ships, and to be set in motion by means of the oars, and to be stationed on the open flank of the enemy, and from that place the enemy to be put to flight and to be driven away with slings, arrows, and ballistae; this thing was of great use for our men. For the barbarians, quite disturbed both because of the shape of the ships and the motion of the oars and by the unaccustomed type of the catapults, stopped and retreated for just a little. And with our soldiers hesitating, especially because of the depth of the sea, he who was carrying the eagle of the tenth legion…4.25.11-4.26.15Having beseeched the gods, that this affair turn out happily/successfully for the legion, “JUMP DOWN,” he said, “comrades, unless you want to betray the eagle to the enemy; I, at least, shall have executed my duty to the republic and the general.” When he had said this in a great (loud) voice, he cast himself forth out of the ship and began to bear the eagle toward/against the enemy. Then our men, cheering each other [Lit. among themselves] that so great a disgrace might not be committed, all together they jumped down from the ship. Likewise, when the first men from the nearby ships had perceived these men, following closely, they approached the enemy.Obstestaus deos: indirect commandDesilite: plural imperativeCommilitones: vocative praestitero: 1st sing future perf, indic, act.Rei publicae atque: datives of referenceHoc: prolepticVoce magna: abl mannerNe tantum: indirect command Admitteretur: collateral derivative Hos item ex… : proleptic (belongs inside the cum clause)Hos? appropinquarunt: synchysisHostibus: dative with a compound verbAppropinquarunt: syncopation4.26.1There was fighting fiercely on both sides. Our men, however, because they could neither preserve their ranks, nor stand firmly, nor follow their standards closely, and one man from one ship, another man from another ship was joining himself to whatever standards he had encountered, were greatly disturbed. The enemy however, with all the shallows being known, whenever they caught sight from the shore of any individuals disembarking from a ship, they were attacking the hindered men, with their horse having been spurred on, rather many were surrounding few, others were throwing missiles-weapons against them all on their open flank. When Caesar had noticed this, he ordered the boats of the warships, likewise the spycraft, to be filled with soldiers, and whom he had caught sight of being in distress, to these he sent reinforcements. Our men, as soon as they took a stand on dry land, with all their men having followed up behind them, they made an attack against the enemies, and they gave them into flight (caused them to flee); nor were they able to follow very far, because the horsemen were not able to hold their course and make the island. This one thing was lacking to the previous fortune for Caesar.Pugnatum est: impersonal passiveAcriter: positive adverbNeque: polysyndetonServare, insistere, subsequi: complementary infQuibuscumque: a big fat indefinite generalizing relativeSignis: dat w compound vNotis omnibus: abl absoluteUbi : “ubi ever” clauseincitatis  equis: abl absolutePlures: comparative adjectiveAlii, alli: assonanceQuod: connective relative, prolepticMilitibus: abl means (with people)Antecedent of quos (postcedent): h?s Suis omnibus consecutis: abl absoluteCaesar: Dat of disadvantage4.27.1-4.28.7 (posset)The enemy, having been beaten in battle, as soon as they recovered themselves from flight, immediately sent legates to Caesar regarding peace; they promised that they would give hostages and would do those things that he commanded // what things he commanded.  Together with these legates, Commius the Atrebation came, whom I have pointed out above had been sent ahead by Caesar into Britain.  Those men had arrested this man disembarking from the ship when he was delivering Caesar’s orders to them in the manner of an envoy, and had thrown him into chains; then, with the battle having been finished [lit., “done/made”], they sent him back and in seeking peace ascribed the fault of this matter to the multitude and on account of their ignorance asked [lit., “sought”] that there be a pardoning.  Caesar, complaining because, although they had sought peace from him with legates having been sent voluntarily to the continent, they had made war without cause, said that he would pardon their ignorance and ordered hostages; of whom those men gave a part immediately, [but] said that they would give a part summoned from rather far places within a few days.  Meanwhile, they ordered their own to return to their fields, and the chiefs began to gather from all sides and to entrust themselves and their states to Caesar.  With peace having been established on these terms [lit., “by these things”], on the fourth day after there was a coming into Britain,  the 18 ships, about which it was pointed out above, which had taken the horsemen on board, set sail from a more northerly port with a gentle wind.  When these were approaching Britain and were seen from the camp, so great a storm suddenly arose that no one of them was able to maintain its course…4.28.7-4.30.4But some were carried back thithersame whence they had set out, others were tossed [lit., “cast down”] to the lower part of the island, which is nearer to the setting of the sun, at great risk to themselves [lit., “with their own great danger”]; these nevertheless, with their anchors having been cast, when they were being filled with waves, having sailed into the deep of necessity, although the night was adverse [lit,  “with night [being] adverse”], they sought the continent.  On the same night it happened that the moon was full, which time is accustomed to form very large maritime swells on the ocean, and this was unknown to our men.  So at one time both the swell/tide had covered/filled the warship, by means of which he had provided for / seen to the transporting of the army, and which Caesar had beached on the dry land, and a storm was striking the freight ships repeatedly, which had been moored at anchors, nor was any opportunity given to our men either of managing [the situation] or of helping.  With rather many ships having been broken, because the rest were, with their ropes, their anchors, and and their remaining tackle/gear having been lost, useless for sailing, the perturbation of all the army became great, that which was necessary to occur.  For there were no other ships of the sort by means of which they might be able to be brought back, and all things which were of use for repairing ships were lacking, and, because it was evident/known to all that it was necessary for there to be a wintering in Gaul, grain had not been provided in these places for winter.  With which things having been learned, the chiefs of Britain, who after the battle had gathered to Caesar, conversing amongst themselves, when they understood that horsemen and ships and grain were lacking to the Romans and they recognized / learned of the paucity of our soldiers from the smallness of the camp…4.30.5-4.32.7Which was also more narrow because of this, because Caesar had transported the legions without baggage, considered/thought, with a rebellion having been made, to prevent/keep our men from grain and provisions, and to prolong the affair into the winter was best to do, because, with these men having been overcome or having been cut off from return, they were confident that no one afterwards for the sake of making war would cross over into Britain.  And so with a conspiracy having been made again, little by little they began to depart from the camp and to bring down their men secretly from the fields. But Caesar, although he did not yet know their plans, nevertheless both from the fate/outcome of his ships and from this thing, that they had omitted to give hostages, was suspecting that that which happened would be.  And so he was making provision for all chances/misfortunes. For he was both collecting grain from the fields into the camp every day, and he was using the timber and the copper of those ships which had been most seriously damaged for the purpose of repairing/refitting the others/rest and he was ordering those which were of use for these matters to be acquired from the continent.  And so, because it was managed by the soldiers with the greatest zeal, with twelve ships having been lost, he brought it about that it was able to be sailed conveniently with the rest.  While these things are being done, with one legion having been sent as usual to forage, which was called the seventh, and with not any suspicion of war having been alleged for/at this time, when part of the men was remaining in the fields, a part also was going back and forth to the camp, those who were on guard duty in front of the gates of the camp announced/reported to Caesar that a larger dust than custom bore/produced was being seen in which direction the legion had made its journey.BRACHYLOGY (the quam in the other passage)4.32.8-4.33.13Caesar, having suspected this thing which was, that some new plan had been entered into by the barbarians, ordered the cohorts which were on guard duty to depart with him in that direction, two of the remaining cohorts to succeed the cohorts on guard duty, the rest to be armed and to follow him closely immediately. When he had preceded a little farther from camp he noticed that his men were being pressed hard by the enemies and were barely holding up and, with the legions having been densely packed, the spears were being hurled from all directions. For, because, with all the grain having been reaped from the remaining areas, one area was remaining, the enemies, suspecting that our men would come hither, had hidden themselves by night in the woods; then, having suddenly attacked the men having been dispersed, with the weapons having been put down, occupied in the reaping, with a few men having been killed, they had greatly disturbed the remaining with the ranks being uncertain, at the same time they had surrounded them with horsemen and chariots.DOCS FAVORITE CHAPTER IN ALL OF [BOOK IV OF] CAESAR - a digression on military scienceThis is the kind of fighting from chariots. First, they ride around through all directions and they hurl missiles(spears) and by means of the terror itself of the horses and by means of the sound of the wheels they generally thoroughly disturbed the ranks, and whenever they insinuate themselves among the squadrons of horses, they jumped down from their chariots and battle on foot[lit. “By means of their feet”]. The charioteers meanwhile little by little withdraw from the battle and so station their chariots that, if those men are pressed hard by a large number of the enemy, they have an unimpeded retreat for their men. Thus, they display in battles the mobility of the horsemen and steadiness of infantry, and by daily practice and exercise, they accomplish so much that they are accustomed to check/restrain their excited horses on a sloping and steep place and to manage and to turn them in a short time and to run along the pole and stand firm on the yoke and to retreat[lit. “recover themselves”] thence into the chariots very rapidly.4.34.1-4.36.1With our men having been thoroughly disturbed by these things, by the newness of the fight, at a very opportune time Caesar brought help: for in fact the enemies stopped because of his arrival, our men recovered themselves from fear.  With which thing having been done, thinking that the time was unfavorable for attacking the enemy and for joining battle, he remained in his place and, with a short time having been let pass, he led his legions back into the camp.While these things occur [lit. “are being done”], with all our men having been occupied, the remaining men who were in the fields departed.  For several continuous days storms followed, of the sort that both were restraining our men in camp and keeping the enemy from the fighting.Meanwhile, the barbarians sent off messengers in all directions and reported the paucity of our soldiers to their men and described how great an opportunity of obtaining loot [lit., “making booty”]  and of liberating themselves forever was being given/offered, if they drove out the Romans from their camp.  With a great multitude of infantry and cavalry having been quickly assembled because of these things, they came to the camp. Caesar, although he saw that the same which had happened on previous days would be, [namely], that, if the enemy were defeated, they would escape danger with speed, nevertheless, having gotten around 30 horsemen, whom Commius the Atrebatian, about whom it has been said before, had transported with him, drew up the legions in a battle line in front of the camp.  With the battle having been joined, the enemy were not able to bear the attack of our soldiers for very long [lit., “for rather long a time”] and they fled [lit., “they turned their backs”].Whom following over so great a space as they were able to accomplish with running and strength, of these they cut down rather many, then, with all buildings far and wide having been set ablaze, they withdrew into camp.On the same day, legates sent by the enemy came to Caesar regarding peace.BOOK 66.13.1 - 6.13.24In all Gual, there are two kinds of those men, who are of some number and distinction. For the people are held almost in the place of slaves, who dare nothing on their own, they are summoned to no council. Very many, when either by someone’s else bronze (debt), or by a magnitude of taxes or by the wrong of the more powerful are overwhelmed, they surrender themselves over into servitude to nobles; who have all the same rights over these men, as masters over slaves. But of these two types, the one is of the Druids, the other of the horsemen (aka the Knights). The former take part in divine affairs, they attend to the public and private sacrifices, they interpret religious issues: to these a large number of young men come for the sake of instruction and these men are of great honor among them.  For about (roughly) all debates, public and private, they decided and if any crime has been committed, if a killing has been made, if there is a debate about inheritance, about boundaries, the same men decide, they establish the rewards and penalties; if any either private individual or tribe has not abided by their decree, they prohibit (them) from sacrifices. This punishment is the most serious among them. 6.13.24-These men to whom there has thus been an interdicting are considered with a number of the ungodly and criminal men, these all men forsake, they shun their approach and conversation, in order that they may not receive any injury as a result of contact (with them), nor is justice rendered to these men, seeking it, nor is any office shared (with them). Moreover, one man is in charge of all these Druids, who holds supreme authority among them. With this man having died, either if anyone of the rest excels in dignity he succeeds, or, if rather many are equal, they contend concerning the leadership by the vote of the Druids, sometimes even by arms. These men at a certain time of year in the territory of the Carnutes, which region is held the middle of all of Gaul, hold sessions in a consecrated place. Hither, from all sides all who have disputes, gather and they obey their decisions and judgements. Their system is thought to have been devised in Britain and to have been brought over from there into Gaul and now those who want to learn that thing more diligently, generally set out thither for the purpose of learning. suffragio/armis - abl meansHoc mortuo - ablative absoluteCerti tempore - time whenquae regio - attractiondecretis/iudiciis - dative with intransitive verbLines 30-31 (disciplinae … existamatur) - personal construction of indirect discourseReperta - reperta esseQui - indefinite antecedent (line 31)Diligentius - comparative adverbDiscendi - gerund6.14The Druids are accustomed to be absent from war, nor do they pay taxes together with the rest; they have an exemption from military service and immunity to all lawsuits. Excited by rewards so great, many both of their own accord assemble for instruction and are sent by their parents and their relatives. There they are said to learn a great number of verses by heart. And so some remain in instruction for 20 years. Nor do they think it right to entrust these things to letters although in almost all remaining matters, in public and private transactions, they use Greek letters. They seem to me to have adopted this for two reasons, because they wish neither the system to be made known among the common folk nor those who learn, relying on letters, to be less zealous for memory; which generally happens to most men, that because of the aid of letters, they relax their diligence in learning thoroughly and their memory. They especially want to inculcate this, that souls do not die but cross over after death from some to others, and they think that men/warriors are especially aroused to courage by this with a fear of death having been disregarded. A bello - ablative separation Consuerent - inchoative verb, syncopationMilitiae/vacationem - obj gen Tantis..praemis - hyperbaton, ablative meansA parentibus/propinquis - ablative agentVersuum - partitive genitive, 4th declension genitive pluralLine 5 - personal construction of indirect discourseMangum … numerum - hyperbatonAnnos vicenos - accusative duration of time, hyperbaton* Vicenos - distributive numeralFas - predicate accusativeMadare - subject accusativeCum in re… - concessiveGraecis litteris - ablative sundry verbsMinus - comparative adverbMemoriae - dative with intransitive verbsQuod - connective relativeUt clause - substantive ut caluse in apposition to quodPraesidio - ablative causePerdiscendo - gerundHoc - internal/cognate accusative* Persuadeo is technically intransitiveLines 1-2 - indirect discourse in apposition to the hoc* Animas = subjective accusativeHoc - ablative of meansMaxime - superlative addverbExcitari - infinitive in indirect discourse governed by putant* Subject accusative is missing in this instance of indirect discourse, supply “men” or “warriors” Mortis - objective genitive6.14.16 - 6.16.7Furthermore they(Druids) discuss and handover to the youth many things concerning the stars and their motion, concerning magnitude of the world and the lands, concerning the nature of things, concerning the power and authority of the immortal gods. The other kind is of the knights. These men, When there is a need and some war occurs (Which was generally accustomed to happen each year before Caesar’s arrival that either they themselves were inflicting injuries or were driving away inflicted ones.) All engage in war and of them as each is very noble in respect to birth and resources, so he has very many vassals and clients around himself. They know this one influence and power. The whole nation of the Gauls is very much given over to religious rites, and for this reason, those who have been afflicted by more serious diseases and those who engage in battles and dangers, either sacrifice men instead of victims or they vow that they will sacrifice (men), and they use the Druids as priests for these sacrifices, because, unless the life of a man is rendered for the life of a man, they think that the divine will of the immortal gods cannot be appeased, and they have publicly established sacrifices of the same kind.Others have images of monstrous size whose limbs woven together with living wreaths they fill with men; with these having been set on fire, the men, having been surrounded by flame are asphyxiated. The punishments of those men of the sort who have been seized in theft, or brigandage, or some crime they think to be more pleasing to the immortal gods; but when a supply of this sort runs out they resort to even the punishments of the innocent.6.17.1-6.18.9They especially worship the god Mercury. Of him there are very many images/statues: they say that he is the inventor/discoverer of all arts, that he is the guide/leader of roads and journeys, they think that he has the greatest power for acquisitions of money and (for) commercial enterprises. After him [they worship] Apollo and Mars and Jupiter and Minerva.About these (divinities) they have generally the same opinion as the rest of the nations: that Apollo wards off diseases, Minerva hands down the beginnings of works and trades, Jupiter holds power over the celestials/heaven dwellers, Mars rules/governs wars. To the latter, whenever they decide to fight in a battle, they generally consecrated those things of the sort which they have captured in war: whenever they win, they sacrifice the captured animals and gather together the remaining things into one place.In many states it is permitted to observe constructed mounds of these things in consecrated places; nor did it often happen that, with religion having been disregarded, anyone dared either to hide the captured things in his own home or to steal the things having been deposited, and the most serious punishment for this matter with torture has been established. The Gauls say that they are all descendents from father Dis, and they say that this has been handed down by the Druids. For this reason, they determine/measure spans of all time not by the number of days but of nights; they so observe birthdays and the beginnings of months and years that the day follows the night. In the remaining customs of life they differ for the most part from the rest in this, that they do not allow their children to approach to themselves publicly, except when they have grown up, with the result that they are able to sustain the duty of military service and they consider it disgraceful that a son of childish age stands near in the presence of his father in public.6.19Husbands, as much moneys as they have received from their wives in the name of a dowry, so much do they share from their own goods with the dowries with an estimate having been made. The account of all this money is jointly held and the interest payments are preserved: which of the two of them will have survived in life, to this one the portion of both falls with the profits of previous times. Husbands have the power of life and death over their wives just as over their children; and whenever the father of a family, born in a rather distinguished rank dies, his relatives gather and if the matter concerning his death has come under suspicion they hold an investigation through torture (lit. unto the servile manner) regarding the wives. And if it has been proved they killed the women having been tortured with fire and all the torture machines. The funerals are magnificent and expensive in accordance with the civilization of the Gauls; and they carry into the fire all the things that they think were dear to them as living, even animals, and a little before this memory slaves and clients who it was known to have been loved by them were burned together with proper funeral rites having been completed.The states which are thought to manage their public affairs more fittly, they have made binding by laws that if anyone hears anything regarding public affairs from his neighbors by rumor or report, he report it to the magistrate and not share it with anyone else because it is known that rash and ignorant men are often frightened by false rumors and are driven to crime and take counsel about the highest matters. The magistrates hide those things which have seemed best (to hide), and they reveal to the multitude those things which they determined to be of use, it is not permitted to speak about public affairs unless through the council. BOOK 55.24 	With the ships having been beached and with the council of the Gauls at Samarobriva having been finished, because in this year grain had grown more narrowly in Gaul on account of droughts. He was compelled otherwise than in earlier years to station the army in winter quarters and to distribute the legions into more states. Of which he gave one to the legate Gauis Fabius to be led to the Morini, a second to Quintus Cicero [to be led] to the Nervii, a third to Lucius Roscius [to be led] to the Esubii. He ordered the fourth to winter among the Remi with Titus Labienus in the neighborhood of the Treveri.       He stationed three among the Bellovaci: He put the quaestor Marcus Crassus and the legates Lucius Munatius Plancus and Gaius Trebonius in charge of these. He sent one legion, which he had recently conscripted across the Po, and five cohorts to the Eburones, of whom the greatest part is between the Meuse and the Rhine, who were under the authority of Ambiorix and Catuvolcus.       He commanded the legates Quintus Titurius Sabinus and Lucius Aurunculeius Cotta to be in charge of these soldiers. With the legions having been distributed in this way, he thought that he could remedy the lack of grain most easily. And yet, all these legions’ winter quarters were contained within a hundred miles except that (legion) which he had given to Lucius Roscius to be led into the most pacified and quietest district. He himself meanwhile decided to linger in Gaul until he knew that legions had been stationed and the winter quarters had been fortified. 5.25:      There was among the Carnutes, having been born in the highest rank, Tasgetius, whose ancestors had held supreme power in their state. To this man, Caesar on account of his good will and fortune toward him had restored the rank of his ancestors, because he had enjoyed his remarkable service in all of his wars. This man, ruling now for the third year his enemies killed, with many openly being instigators from the community. This matter is reported to Caesar.       He, fearing, because it pertained to rather many,  that the state would revolt because of their instigation, he ordered Lucius Plancus to set out speedily with the legion from Belgium to the Carnutes , and to winter there, and to send to him these men having been arrested by whose effort he had learned Tasgetius had been killed. Meanwhile, by all the legates and quaestors, to whom he had handed over legions, he was informed that there had been an arriving in winter quarters and that the place for winter quarters had been fortified. 5.26:      Within about 15 days during which there was a coming into the winter quarters, the beginning of the sudden confusion and revolt arose from Ambiorix and Catavulcus; and these men when they had met Sabinus and Cotta at the boundaries of their kingdom and had brought grain into the winter quarters, impelled by the messages of Indutiomarus, the Treveri, they incited their own men and with the wood foragers having been suddenly overwhelmed they came to the camp to attack with a great band.       When our men had quickly taken up arms and ascended the rampart and with the spanish calvary having been sent out one side, they had been superior in an equestrian battle, with the matter having been despaired of, the enemy drew off their men from the attack. Then they shouted in accordance with their custom that someone of their men come forth for a parlay: (saying that) they had things, which they wished to say about the common matter, by means of which things they hoped that their disputes could be diminished. 5.27.:      Gaius Arpineius, a Roman knight, an intimate friend of Quintus Titurius and a certain Quintus Junius from Spain, who was already accustomed before to go back and forth to Ambiorix sent by Caesar; is sent to them for the purpose of parlaying; in the presence of whom Ambiorix spoke in this manner: [Saying that] he confessed that he owed very much to him in return for Caesar’s benefits to himself, because by his effort he had been freed from tribute, which he was accustomed to pay to the Aduatici, his neighbors, and because both his son and his brother’s son had been sent back to him by Caesar, whom having been sent in the number of the hostages, the Aduatici had held with them in servitude and chains;       nor had he done that which he did regarding the attack of the camp either because of his own judgment or will, but because of the compulsion of the state and his own orders were of such a sort that the multitude did not have less right over him than he himself over the multitude. Furthermore, the state had had this reason for war, because it was not able to resist a sudden conspiracy of the Gauls.       He could prove this easily from his own humility because he is not so inexperienced in affairs that he is confident that the Roman people is able to be overcome with his troops. But, Gaul had a common plan: for the purpose of attacking all of Caesar’s winter quarters this was the appointed day, in order that not any legion might be able to come to the aid of a second legion. Gauls could not easily say no to Gauls, especially since it was seeming that a plan regarding the recovering of their common liberty had been entered into.       Since he did enough for these men in accordance with piety, he now had a plan of allegiance in return for Caesar’s benefits: he was warning, he was begging Titurius in consideration of their guest friendship that he consult the safety of himself and his soldiers. A great hired band of Germans had crossed the Rhine, this would be present in two days.Next Day:	The plan was of themselves whether they wish, before their neighbors perceive it to conduct their soldiers having been led out of winter quarters either to Cicero or to Labienus, of whom the one is about 50 miles distant from them, the other a little farther. He promised and confirmed that with an oath, that he would grant a safe journey through their territory.       Because he is doing this, he is both consulting the interests of his state, because it is being relieved of the winter quarters, and he is returning thanks to Caesar for his merits. With this speech having been given, Ambiorix departs.  5.28      Arpineus and Junius report to the legates those things which they have heard. Those men thoroughly disturbed by the sudden affair, although those things were being said by an enemy, they nevertheless were  thinking that they ought not to be neglected, and they were especially thoroughly moved by this thing, because it was scarcely to be believed that the undistinguished and humble state of the Eburones dared to make war against the Roman people of its own accord. And so they report the matter to their council and a great controversy ensues among them.      Lucius Aurunculeius and several tribunes and soldiers and centurions of the first ranks were thinking that nothing ought to be done rashly and that there ought not be a departing from the winter quarters without Caesar's command. They were informing that however great forces, even of Germans could be withstood with the winter quarters having been fortified: The matter was for proof, because they very stoutly sustained the first attack of the enemy, with many wounds furthermore having been inflicted: they were not being pressed hard by the food supply (lit. grain thing): meanwhile reinforcements were going to come together from the nearest winter quarters and from Caesar: finally, what was more fickle or more disgraceful than to form a plan about the highest matters with the enemy being the instigator?5.29      Against these things Titurius was shouting over and over again that they would be acting too late, because rather large/great bands of enemies had assembled, with Germans having been joined to [them], or because some disaster [lit., “something of a disaster”] had been suffered in the nearest winter quarters. The opportunity/occasion for consulting/taking counsel [lit., “of”] was brief. He thought that Caesar had set out into Italy; neither otherwise would the Carnutes have adopted the plan of killing Tasgetius, nor, if he [Caesar] was near, would the Eburones be going to come to the camp with so great a disdain of us.       He was looking not at the enemy [as] instigator, but the situation: the Rhine was nearby; the death of Ariovistus and our previous victories were a source of great grief to/for the Germans; Gaul was burning, with so many insults having been received, subjugated under the power of the Roman people, with its/her prior reputation for military affairs having been extinguished.       Finally who could persuade himself of this, that without certain proof Ambiorix would have descended to a plan of this sort? His own opinion was safe in each direction: if nothing more difficult/hard should happen [lit., “be”], they would reach the nearest legion with no danger; if all Gaul was combining with the Germans, their one/only safety was placed in celerity/speed/swiftness/quickness/blah, blah, blah.             Of Cotta indeed and of those who disagreed, what outcome did the plan have? In which [case/situation], if not present danger, at least surely hunger because of a long siege had to be feared?5.30-5.31      With this dispute having been held on each side, when he was fiercely opposed by cotta and the first ranks, “conquer, if you so wish”, said Sabinus, and this with a louder voice in order that a great part of the soldiers might over hear; nor am I such a man that I am frightened most seriously by the danger of death among you, he said; These men will understand; if something rather serious happens, they will demand a reckoning from you, who if it should be permitted by you, on the day after tomorrow, having been united with the neighboring winter quarters, they would sustain the common chance of war with the rest, would not die either by the sword or from famine, having been repelled and removed far from the rest.       There is a rising together from the council; They seize both of them and they plead/beg that by their disagreement and obstinacy they not bring their affair into the highest peril; [saying that] the matter is easy, whether they stay or they depart if only they should all think and approve of one; On the contrary, they realize that there is no safety in disagreement. The matter is drawn out to the middle of the night with discussion. 	At last Cotta, thoroughly moved, gives up: the opinion of Sabinus prevails. It is proclaimed that they will go at dawn. The remaining part of the night is consumed with watches, when each soldier was examining his things, what he was able to carry with him, what he was compelled to leave behind from the equipment of the winter quarters.       All things are devised, why there is a staying not without danger. And (why) the danger is increased by the weakness of soldiers and watches. At dawn, they so set out from their camp as to whom there had been a persuading not by an enemy, but [as to whom] a plan had been given by the very friendly fellow Ambiorix, with the very long column and with very great baggage. 5.32-5.33.16But the enemy, after they perceived regarding their departure as a result of the nocturnal uproar and the watches, with an ambush having been stationed in two places in the woods at an opportune and hidden location, from about two miles away they were awaiting the arrival of the Romans, and when the greater part of the column had descended into a large defile, from both sides of this defile they suddenly revealed themselves and began to press hard rear guard and prohibit the vanguard from climbing, and to join battle in a place very disadvantageous for our men.Then at last, Titurius, since he had provided for nothing beforehand, shook with fear and ran about and stationed the cohorts, yet these very things [he did] timidly and with result that all things seemed to be failing him; which is generally accustomed to happen to those men who are forced to form a plan in the business itself. But Cotta, because he had thought these things could happen on the journey and because of this cause, he had not been a promoter of the departure, was failing the common safety in no circumstance and he was fulfilling the duties both of a general in calling and exhorting orders and of a soldier in the fight. Since because of the length of the column they were able less easily to attend to all things on their own and to foresee what had to be done in each place, they ordered to announce that they leave behind the baggage and they stand into a circle. Which plan, although in a misfortune of this sort, is not to be blamed/sensured, nevertheless it happened inconveniently/unfortunately: for it both diminished the hope for our soldiers and rendered the enemy more eager for the fight, because it seemed to have been done not without the highest fear and despair. Line 31: Furthermore it happened, which was necessary to happen, that everywhere the soldiers were departing from their standards, which things each of them was regarding as most dear, he was hastening to seek and seize from the baggage, all things were being filled with shouting and weeping.But a plan was not lacking to/for the barbarians. For their leaders ordered to announce along the whole battle line that not anyone depart from his place: [saying that] theirs was the booty and for them were reserved whatever things the Romans left behind: accordingly, let them think that all things were placed in victory.They were equal in both courage and zeal for fighting; our men, although they were being deserted by their commander and by Fortune, nevertheless, were putting all hope of safety in courage, and as often as each cohort ran forth, on that side a great number of the enemy fell.With this matter having been noticed, Ambiorix commands (it) to be announced that they hurl their missile weapons from afar and not approach too close and, in what direction the Romans have made an attack, they yield (because of the lightness of their arms and because of their daily exercise it was not possible for there to be a harming at all to/for them), [and that] in turn they follow closely them retreating back to their standards.With which instruction having been observed by them most diligently, whenever each cohort went out from the circle and made an attack, the enemy fled back very swiftly. Meanwhile it was necessary for that part to be exposed and for weapons to be received on the open flank. Whenever in turn they began to go back towards that place whence they had set out, they were being surrounded both by those who had withdrawn and by those who had stood nearby; but if however they were wishing to hold their position, a place for courage was not left, nor, stuffed together, were they able to avoid missile weapons hurled by so great a multitude.BOOK 5 part 25.35.9 - page 114      Nevertheless, distressed by so many inconveniences, with many wounds having been accepted they were resisting, and with a great part of the day having been used up/ spent, although there was a fighting from dawn to the eighth hour, they were allowing nothing of the sort which was unworthy of themselves.       Then both thighs of Titus Balventius who had led the first century in the previous year,  a man brave and of great authority, are pierced by a spear; Quintus Lucanius, of the same rank, fighting very bravely, while he comes to help his son, having been surrounded, is killed; Luciu s Cotta, the legate, inciting all the cohorts and ranks, is wounded by a slingshot, into the adverse face.        Quintus Titurius, thoroughly moved by these things, when from a distance, he had perceived Ambiorix, Encouraging his men, sends his interpreter Gnaius Pompeius to him, to ask that he spare him [Quintus Titurius Sabinus] and his soldiers. He, having been called upon, responded: [saying that] if he wishes to converse with him, it is permitted; he hopes that that which pertains to the safety of the soldiers can be obtained by the multitude; but there will not at all be a harming to himself and he pledges his fidelity for this matter.	He communicates with the wounded Cotta whether it seems right that they retire/withdraw from the fight and they parley/converse together with Ambiorix: [saying that] he hopes that from him, regarding his own and the soldiers safety, it can be obtained. Cotta says he will not go to the armed enemy, and in that he perseveres.5.37-5.38      Sabinus orders the tribunes of the soldiers whom he had around him at the time then and the centurions of the first ranks to follow him and when he had approached nearer to Ambiorix having been ordered to put down arms does the thing having been ordered and orders his men to do the same. Meanwhile, while they discuss among themselves regarding the terms and a longer conversation is begun on purpose by Ambiorix, having been surrounded little by little he is killed.       Then they truly according to their custom shout victory and raise an ululation and with an attack having been made against our men they throw the ranks into confusion. There Lucius Cotta fighting is killed with the greatest part of the soldiers, the rest retreat into the camp from whence they had set out. And from these men Lucius Pertrosdius, the standard bearer when he was being pressed hard by a great multitude of the enemy he threw the eagle within the wall; he himself is killed fighting most bravely before the camp.      They with difficulty sustain the attack to the night; at night to a man they all themselves kill themselves with safety having been despaired of. A few men having escaped from the battle by uncertain routes, they arrive through the forest to Titus Labinius the legate to his winter quarters, and they inform him about the things having been done.       Ambiorix elated, by this victory immediately with the calvary departs for the Aduatici who were neighbors to his kingdom; he lets neither night nor day pass, and he orders the infantry to follow closely.       With the matter having been explained and with the Aduatici having been incited, on the following day he reaches the Nervi and exhorts that they not let pass the opportunity of liberating themselves forever and of punishing the Romans for those wrongs which they have received; he declares that two legates have been killed and a large part of the army died; (saying that) it would be no trouble (lit. nothing of business) for the legion which is wintering with Cicero having been suddenly overwhelmed to be killed; he declares himself a helper for this matter. With this speech he easily persuades the Nervi. 5.39      And so with messengers having been sent off immediately to the Ceutrones, the Grudii, Levaci, the Pleumoxii, the Geidumni who are all under their authority, they gather bands as large as they are able, and without warning fly to Cicero’s winter quarters with the report about the death of Titurius having not yet been delivered to him. To this man also it happened (which it was necessary) that some soldiers who had gone out into the woods for the sake of wood cutting and fortification were intercepted by the sudden arrival of the cavalry.      With these men having been surrounded by a large band, the Eburones, Nervii, Aduatici, and the allies and clients of all these begin to attack the legion. Our men swiftly run to their arms, they mount the rampart. With difficulty this day is endured because the enemy were placing all their hope in speed and, if they obtained this victory (lit. having obtained this victory), they were confident that they would be victors forever.  5.40	Letters are sent immediately by Cicero to Caesar, with great rewards having been proposed, if they delivered them: with all the roads having been blockaded, the men sent are intercepted. At night out of the timber, which they had collected for the sake of fortification, fully 120 towers were constructed with unbelievable speed; those things which seemed to be missing to the fortifications (lit. the work) are completed.      The enemy on the following day, with much greater forces having been gathered, attacked the camp,  they filled the ditch. By the same plan as on the day before, there is a resisting by our men. This same thing happens thereafter on the remaining days. No part of the night time is omitted for labor; Not to the sick, not to the wounded is an opportunity for rest given.__________________________________________________________________________________	Whatever things there is need of for the attack of the next day are prepared by night; many foreburnt stakes [are prepared], a great number of mural javelins is prepared; towers are built up, battlements and breastworks are woven on out of wickerworks.  Cicero himself, although he was of very delicate health, left not even night time for himself for rest, with the result that he was spontaneously compelled by the running together and voices of the soldiers to spare himself.5.41	Then the leaders and chiefs of the Nervii who had some right to approach for conversation [lit., “some approach of conversation”] and cause of friendship with Cicero say that they wish to converse.  With permission having been granted [lit., “with power having been made”], they mention the same things that Ambiorix had discussed with Titurius: [saying that] all Gaul was in arms; the Germans had crossed the Rhine; the winter quarters of Caesar and the rest were being attacked.  They add also regarding the death of Sabinus: they exhibit Ambiorix for the sake of convincing them [lit., “for the sake of making faith”].	They [= the Gauls] say that they [= the Romans] are mistaken if they are hoping for any protection [lit., “anything of protection”] from these men, since they lack confidence in / are despairing of their own situation [lit., “their own things/affairs”]; yet they [= the Gauls] are of such a mind toward Cicero and the Roman people that they reject/refuse nothing except the winter quarters and do not want this custom to become established: [adding that] it is permitted for them [= the Romans] to depart unharmed on their own / under their own power [lit., “through themselves”] from their winter quarters and to set out without fear into whatever places/directions/areas they wish.	To these things Cicero answered just one thing: WE DO NOT NEGOTIATE WITH TERRORISTS [lit., “it was not the custom of the Roman people to accept a condition from an armed enemy”]: [adding that], if they are willing to depart from their arms, they might use him as a helper and send legates to Caesar; he hopes that, in accordance with his [= Caesar’s] justice, they will obtain those things that they have sought.  – Cicero Is cold af5.42      The Nervii repulsed from this hope surround the winter quarters with a wall of 9 feet and a trench of 15 fifteen feet. These things they both knew from us with the practice of previous years and they were  being taught by those whom they held secretly from the army as captives; but with there being no supply of iron tools of the sort which were suitable for this use they were seen to cut off pieces of turf with swords to empty the soil with their hands and small coats. 	From which thing indeed the multitude of men was able to be learned: for in less than 3 hours they finished a fortification of 15 miles in circumference and on the remaining days they began to prepare and make towers to the height of the rampart, hooks and sheds which the same captives had taught [them to make].	5.43      On the seventh day of the attack with a very great wind having arisen they began to throw glowing slugs of molten lead clay with slings and heated javelins into the huts which had been thatched with straw in accordance with the Gallic custom. These caught fire quickly and winds scattered it in every place of the camp because of their strength/magnitude.       The enemy with a very great shout, with victory just as if  already won and secure, they began to drive the towers and the sheds and to climb the rampart with ladders. 	But so great was the courage of the soldiers and such was their presence of mind that although they were scorched by flame on all sides and pressed by a very great multitude of spears and understood that all their baggage and all their fortunes were burning, not only did no one step away from the rampart for the sake of moving away but (almost nobody) almost anybody did not even look back and then all were fighting most sharply and most bravely.This day was by far the most serious for our men; but nevertheless it had this outcome, that on that day a very great number of the enemy was wounded and was killed, as they had crowded themselves closely under the rampart itself and the last were not giving a retreat to the first. With the flame having abated a little indeed and with a tower having been thrust in a certain place and touching the rampart the centurions of the third cohort withdrew from that place in which they were standing, and they removed all their men, they began to call the enemy by nodding and words, if they wish to enter; of whom no one dared to advance. Then, they were dislodged by stones thrown from every direction, and the tower was set on fire. There were in this legion very brave men, centurions of the sort who were approaching the first ranks, Titus Pullo and Lucius Vorenus. These men used to have continual debates between themselves, which was to be preferred, and they were contending in all years concerning their ranks with the greatest rivalries. Of these men Pullo, when there was a fighting most sharply near the fortifications, “Why do you hesitate,” he says, “Vorenus?Or what opportunity for proving your courage are you waiting for? This day will decide concerning our disputes.” When he had said these things, he advances outside the fortifications and storms which part of the enemy seemed densest. Then not even Vorenus remains on the rampart, but fearing the opinion of all, he follows closely. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------With a moderate space having been left, Pullo throws the javelin at the enemy and pierces one running forth out of the multitude; with which man having been struck and killed, they protect this man (aka the pierced man), with their shields, they as one hurl their missile weapons against the enemy nor do they give an opportunity of withdrawing. Pullo’s shield is pierced through and a javelin gets stuck in his sword belt. This misfortune turns aside his scabbard and delays the right hand for him trying to draw his sword, and the enemies surround him having been hindered. Vorenus, his enemy/frenemy/rival/nemesis, runs to aid him and assists him in his distress [lit: “him suffering”] to this man, immediately the whole multitude turns itself from Pullo: they think that that man has been killed by the spear. Vorenus conducts the affair hand to hand, and with one man having been killed, he drives back the rest for a little; while he presses on rather eagerly, having been cast down he falls down into a lower place. In turn, to this man having been surrounded, Pullo brings aid, and both, with many having been killed, withdraw unharmed within the fortifications with the highest praise.Thus fortune dealt with each (of the two) in struggle and in strife, with the result that the one rival was a source of aid and safety to the other, nor could it be decided, which (of the two) seemed to be to be preferred in courage.5.45The more serious and harsher the attack was day by day, and especially because with a great part of the soldiers having been exhausted by wounds, the matter had come to a small number of defenders, the more frequently [lit: an adjective] letters and messengers were being sent to Caesar; of whom, a part having been caught, was killed with torture in the sight of our soldiers. There was on the inside, one Nervian, Vertico by name, born in a distinguished rank who from the beginning of the siege had fled to Cicero for refuge and had exhibited his fidelity to him. This man persuades a slave with the hope of freedom and with great rewards, that he bring the letter to Caesar. That man carries this attached on a javelin and conducting himself as a Gaul among Gauls without any suspicion he reaches Caesar. From him it is learned about the dangers of Cicero and the legion. Caesar, with the letter having been received at about the eleventh hour of the day, immediately sends a messenger to the Bellovaci to Marcus Crassus the quaestor, whose winter quarters were twenty five miles away from him. He orders the legion to set out at midnight and to come to him swiftly. Crassus departs with the messenger. He sends a second to the legate Gaius Fabius that he bring his legion into the territory of the Atrebatians, where he knew that the journey had to be made by him. He writes to Labienus, [that], if he could act for the advantage of the republic, he come with his legion to the territory of the Nervii. He does not think that the remaining part of the army, because it was a little too far (away), was to be expected. He collects approximately four hundred horsemen from the nearest winter quarters. Having been informed by the vanguard about Crassus’s arrival at approximately the third hour, on that day he advances twenty miles. He puts Crassus in charge of Samarobriva and gives him a legion, because there he was leaving the baggage of the army, the hostages of the states, the public documents and all the grain which he had brought hither for the sake of tolerating the winter. Fabius, as had been commanded, delaying not so much meets him on the journey with his legion.