The Definition of Paralysis

While the theme of paralysis is portrayed through many characters in the storylines of Dubliners by James Joyce and Jhumpa Lahiri’s Interpreter of Maladies, Joyce and Lahiri use the specific feeling of powerlessness that both Mrs. Mina Das and Eveline Hill face in their lives in the short stories “Interpreter of Maladies” and “Eveline” to portray how little mobility they believe they have. In the short story “Interpreter of Maladies,” Mrs. Das is a stereotypical American tourist from New Jersey who hires Mr. Kapasi, a driver and former medical translator, to transport her family to the Sun Temple. On the journey, Mrs. Das confides in Mr. Kapasi about her feeling trapped in a life she does not want, hoping he will have a cure for her. The short story “Eveline” portrays a young woman named Eveline who has been given the opportunity to marry her lover Frank and move to Buenos Aires, leaving behind her home in Dublin in search of a better life. However, it is revealed that despite the clear opportunity, that Eveline would rather hold onto her familiar past than to face an unknown future. Despite the unique challenges that Mrs. Das and Eveline face in their different lives, Mrs. Das experiences more paralysis due to her emotional attachment to her life and responsibilities as a mother and wife.
Unlike Eveline, who has a clear opportunity to leave her life behind, Mrs. Das has children with her husband and thus has no easy escape from her life. Mrs. Das’s unattentiveness with her children is revealed early on in the story, Lahiri strategically placing odd interactions the 28-year-old mother has with her children. An example of this is when her daughter Tina wants her mother’s attention, “The little girl stuck out her hand. ‘Mine too. Mommy, do mine too.’ ‘Leave me alone,’ Mrs. Das said, blowing on her nail and turning her body slightly. ‘You’re making me mess up.’” (48) This interaction between Mrs. Das and Tina is pretty representative of the relationship Mrs. Das has with her children, especially how she views them, in addition to her husband,  as a burden on her life. When Mrs. Das takes a keen interest in Mr. Kapasi’s work and life it becomes clear that she likes to dream of a life without her children and husband and that she feels trapped in the situation she has created for herself. Because Mrs. Das has spent most of the car ride painting her nails, ignoring her children, and deriding her husband for his tourist activities, Mrs. Das’s sudden interest in Mr. Kapasi’s life makes it blatantly obvious that she enjoys hearing about other people’s lives in the effort to dream of an alternate reality where she is not trapped in her own. Upon hearing about Mr. Kapasi’s work translating patients’ symptoms to doctors, Mrs. Das replies, “‘How romantic… Tell us more about your job, Mr. Kapasi.’” (50). Unfortunately for her, Mrs. Das’s daydreams are not realistic as she does not have the opportunity to leave her family behind without major consequences. Eveline, however, does have the opportunity to leave her home behind relatively easily, as her lover Frank has offered to bring her with him to Buenos Aires on a ship and marry and support her as they create a new life for themselves. She dreams of the idea, “In her new home, in a distant unknown country…she would be married…People would treat her with respect then. She would not be treated as her mother had been.” (30) Unlike Mrs. Das, Eveline has a clear opportunity to escape her life, one that will seemingly most likely end like her mother’s and one that she also wants to escape. However, she makes up excuses explaining her need to stay, despite the few ties that hold her in Dublin. Joyce describes, “She had hard work to keep the house together and to see that the two young children who has been left to her charge went to school regularly and got their meals regularly. It was hard work- a hard life- but now that she was about to leave it she did not find it a wholly undesirable life.” (31) Eveline approaches her journey with trepidation and even convinces herself that she would not be entirely unhappy if she were to stay in Dublin, however it is clear that her reponsibilities are not vital to her family and she is given the unparalleled opportunity to escape a life her mother had not been able to. Because Eveline is not as bound to her situation as Mrs. Das, and is even given a simple escape, it is clear that Mrs. Das experiences far more paralysis in her inescapable life.
While Eveline struggles internally about how to handle her unique opportunity, Mrs. Das feels so trapped in her life that she feels the need to seek help. Clearly, Mrs. Das is so frustrated by her life that she is willing to confide in a stranger for advice. While her family is out exploring, Mrs. Das privately tells Mr. Kapasi not only that she had an affair 8 years ago and that Bobby, one of her three children, is not Mr. Das’s son, but also that she feels the need to escape her life entirely. She remarks, “I feel terrible looking at my children, and at [Mr. Das], always terrible. I have terrible urges, Mr. Kapasi, to throw things away. One day I had the urge to throw everything I own out the window, the television, the children, everything. Don’t you think it’s unhealthy?’”(64) The description of her urge to throw her children out the window is key because these images are clearly those of someone so frustrated that she wishes she could leave behind people she cares about. Confiding this gruesome thought with Mr. Kapasi illustrates her need for help and the immense pressure she feels because of the paralysis she is experiencing. Contrastingly, while Eveline struggles with the decision of whether or not to leave her life behind and start anew, she is able to escape the feeling of immobility that she has in life because of her freedom of choice. Joyce reveals her internal conflict, “She has consented to go away, to leave her home. Was that wise? She tried to weigh each side of the question. In her home anyway she had shelter and food; she has those whom she had known all her life about her.” (30) Because she is able to determine her future,  Eveline is not as stuck in her life as Mrs. Das is, and even eventually chooses to stay home. Moreover, Eveline has the ability to change her life’s course and decide on a better future for herself than the one her mother suffered which is not the case for Mrs. Das. Unfortunately, Mrs. Das has already made decisions in her past that she must stand by for the rest of her life and is not given this easy choice. 
Mrs. Das shows a clear emotional attachment and a newfound appreciation for her family when it is threatened to be taken away contributing to the amount that ties her to her life. Contrastingly, Eveline’s heart is not particularly attached to her family or home, which is revealed when she convinces herself to run away with Frank. Although she may not want to admit it, Mrs. Das feels a sense of attachment and duty to the family she has created which emerges first in the form of guilt and then through instinctual motherly protectiveness. When Mrs. Das elucidates the pain she feels in her life for having kept her affair and Bobby’s parentage from her husband it becomes clear that the pain she feels is a result of the love that she has for her family, and the regret she holds for having done something so reckless. She pleads with Mr. Kapasi, “‘Well, don’t you have anything to say?...About my secret, and about how terrible it makes me feel.’”(64) Mr. Kapasi simply responds by telling Mrs. Das that she is experiencing guilt because she loves her family. She quickly comes to realize this herself when Bobby is attacked by monkeys and her protective maternal response kicks in. This is the first point when the reader is able to see how much Mrs. Das cares for her children. When Mrs. Das realizes her son is in danger, she screams, “‘Mr. Kapasi…Do something, for God’s sake, do something!’” (67) After Mr. Kapasi scares off the monkeys and returns Bobby to his mother, she cares for him with new sensitivity and realizes that she could not live without her family. It is this attachment that also keeps Mrs. Das paralyzed in the life she has created because as much as she may feel she has detached from her family, she is truly just suffocated by guilt weighing her down. Unlike Mrs. Das’s attachment to the life she is bound to, Eveline does not have as prominent emotional attachments to her home. She is more fearful about a new journey and leaving the familiarity of home than she is attached to the life she has experienced. Joyce even describes how little remains of the life she once lived at home. “That was a long time ago; she and her brothers and sisters were all grown up; her mother was dead…Everything Changes. Now she was going to go away like the others, to leave her home. Home! She looked around the room, reviewing all its familiar objects which she had dusted once a week for so many years, wondering where on Earth all the dust came from. Perhaps she would never see again those familiar objects from which she had never dreamed of being divided.” (29-30) Joyce’s use of objects being her first thought of things she may miss means that she has very little emotionally tying her to her home in Dublin. Instead, it shows that Eveline has become comfortable with the rhythm of the activities she performs at home, which further proves that it is the fear of the unknown that keeps her home, significantly less pressing than an emotional and dutiful need to remain with her family like Mrs. Das experiences.
While she may dream of other realities, Mrs. Das feels stuck in her life and realizes that she will never be able to escape her reality because of her responsibilities as a wife and mother. Eveline is given and chooses not to take an opportunity that would completely diffuse the paralysis that she feels living at home in Dublin. Ultimately, while both Mrs. Das and Eveline experience unique forms of paralysis in their lives, Mrs. Das’s obligation to her family and the life she has created for herself affects her far more than Eveline, who is not emotionally attached to her life and simply chooses not to change for fear of the unknown. 
