Imagine you're face-to-face with one of the most dangerous birds on earth—the ostrich. Extremely fast on foot, these massive birds can run up to 45 mph (72.5 kph).[1] Not to mention, ostriches can deliver mortal blows by the sheer force of their legs and lethally sharp talons. Although they don’t prey on humans, ostriches have been known to injure and kill when provoked. So how should you react? The best thing you can do is steer clear and keep your distance. If that fails, ducking for cover and hiding works best. As a last resort, you may even have to fight them. Wondering how to beat an ostrich? Read on for the ultimate ostrich-attack survival guide.
1) Use a long weapon. If you are forced to defend yourself against an ostrich, avoid close-quarters combat. Keep as far out of reach of its legs as you can, since ostriches can kick hard enough to kill a lion. Use the nearest, longest object that could be used as a weapon, such as a pole, rake, broom, or branch.
If you have a gun and need to use it, aim for the ostrich's main body to better ensure hitting your target. Although they will be attacking with their legs and/or beak, their legs and neck are very thin and easy to miss.
2) Keep to the ostrich’s side. Consider yourself at the most risk when the two of you are face-to-face. Remember that an ostrich is only able to kick its legs directly in front of it. Stay behind or to the side of the bird as much as possible to keep clear of its most powerful weapon.
3) Aim for the neck. Consider this to be the ostrich’s weakest body part. Strike it where it is most vulnerable and least protected to defeat it more quickly. Failing that, aim for its breast. Concentrate your efforts between the two as opportunity affords. Continue to strike until it quits and runs away.
4) Damage its wings. If the ostrich refuses to give up despite your attacks to its neck, aim for its wings when given the opportunity. Know that an ostrich uses its wings not for flight, but to alter course more smoothly when running, just like a ship’s rudder. Damaging its wings may marginally improve your chances of running away in a zigzag fashion if you are forced to retreat
5) Go for its legs. If you find yourself behind or to the side of the ostrich with an easy shot to one of its legs, take it. Know that the ostrich’s center of gravity depends entirely upon those two skinny legs. If given the chance, deliver one or both a blow to upset its balance, speed, and striking power.