Who is Really Guilty?
Throughout Truman Capote’s In Cold Blood, there is a constant debate over the levels of guiltiness between both Dick and Perry. In November, 1959, a tragic crime takes place in the small town of Halcomb, Kansas. One evening, Dick Hickock and Perry Smith travel to the small town, where they rob and murder the Clutter family. Dick’s psychopathic tendencies paired with Perry’s sociopathic nature allows Dick to not only take advantage of his friend’s weak mental state, but also cause him to commit many more crimes than simply a murder. In addition to planning the robbery and murder at the Clutter property, Dick also attempts to rape a girl and lies to the police. Despite Perry being the man who pulls the trigger, Dick is more guilty of the Clutter family murder as he is the mastermind behind the crime who takes advantage of his friend’s mental state with his seemingly macho attitude.
Perry’s abusive childhood creates an unhealthy mental state that causes him to follow in Dick’s shadow despite not fully supporting the plan. While in jail, Dick becomes friends with his cellmate, Floyd Wells. Here, Dick learns about an employer Wells worked for in Holcomb, Kansas, who Wells says has large sums of money on his property, kept in a safe. As Dick begins to hear more about this specific family and the layout of their house, he formulates an idea that he shares with Wells. “Dick was talking about killing Mr. Clutter. Said him and Perry was gonna go out there and rob the place, and they were gonna kill all witnesses - the Clutters, and anybody else that happened to be around” (161). One of Dick’s main traits is his ability to lead and create a plan for others to follow. Despite seeming stable and sane mentally, Dick’s actions allude to his psychopathic nature. One feature of psychopaths is their desire to carefully plan their crimes to minimize risk to themselves, which is exactly what Dick does. Conversely, Perry often shows sociopathic behavior, one of which is being a follower. Immediately preceding the crime, the interaction between Dick and Perry highlights Perry’s follower mentality and Dick’s leadership style because he forces his friend to engage in a crime that could otherwise be prevented. “I told Dick to count me out. If he was determined to go ahead with it, he’d have to do it alone…He was sore as hell. I could see he was thinking, Here I’ve set up this big score, here we’ve come all this way, and now this punk wants to chicken out. He said, ‘Maybe you think I ain’t got the guts to do it alone. But, by God, I’ll show you who’s got guts.’ There was some liquor in the car. We each had a drink, and I told him, ‘O.K., Dick. I’m with you” (235). Dick’s influence over Perry allows him to bully his friend into murdering an innoncent family. Perry shows a common characteristic of sociopaths as the crimes he involves himself in are largely impulsive and unplanned, with little thought about the consequences. This scene highlights Perry’s failure to think through plans as he underestimates the consequences of the robbery and murder until he arrives on the scene, where a flickering light in a nearby house frightens him. However, Dick’s masculine and powerful attitude, in which he shows a lack of need for Perry, leads Perry to follow Dick. Despite Perry’s ability to stand on his own, he often lurks in the footsteps of Dick as his more feminine, timid qualities are exemplified in comparison to Dick’s strong, macho demeanor. Dick’s ability to manipulate and coerce Perry into robbing and murdering the Clutter family is attributed to the leader-follower dynamic of the two friends. 
Despite Perry murdering the entire Clutter family, Dick’s desire to commit the crime and to rape Nancy Clutter highlights his guiltiness. As Dick and Perry enter the Clutter property, they immediately enter Herb Clutter’s study in search of the safe that Dick’s former cellmate told him was there. When they fail to locate the safe and as Perry begins to think there is no money in this house, they come across Mr. Clutter, who promises that there is no safe on his property. This convinces Perry, leading him to attempt to persuade his friend to leave the house. “I told Dick, ‘These people are telling the truth. The one who lied is your friend Floyd Wells. There isn’t any safe, so let’s get the hell out of here.’ But Dick was too ashamed to face it. He said he wouldn’t believe it til we searched the whole house. He said the thing to do was tie them all up, then take our time looking around. You couldn’t argue with him, he was so excited. The glory of having everybody at his mercy, that’s what excited him” (239). Dick’s psychopathic nature and Perry’s desire to abort their mission and leave the Clutter’s in peace differentiates the morals of the two men. Dick’s ego and masculine attitude, which makes him seemingly fearless, prevailed at this moment, causing the men to remain in the house and ultimately commit a larger crime than necessary. In contrast, Perry demonstrates a more of a femine attitude, as he often shows both fear and guilt, emphasized in this interaction. Dick is not only more guilty of a crime because he persuades his friend to stay in the house, but also in the way he speaks about and intends to treat Nancy Clutter. Perry explains the disgust he felt towards his friend at his thoughts and desires, as Perry prevented him from following through on his plan. “[Dick] says to me, as we’re heading along the hall toward Nancy’s room, ‘I’m gonna bust that little girl.’ And I said, ‘Uh-huh. But you’ll have to kill me first.’ He looked like he didn’t believe he’d heard right. He says, ‘What do you care? Hell, you can bust her, too’” (243). Perry’s feminine nature leaves him disgusted by Dick’s sexual desire, which explains his response to Dick’s desire to rape Nancy. Perry’s actions also emphasize that Dick is more guilty throughout their time in the Clutter house as his intentions include not only tying up the family, robbing them, but also raping an innocent young girl. Dick’s masculine, egostistical attitude leads him to tie up the entire Clutter family, despite his awareness of the low probability of the family having a large sum of money, while also intending to rape Nancy Clutter. 
The lengths that Dick is willing to go to cover up the crime, paired with his natural leadership, allows him to go to any extreme to save himself, highlighting his greater role in the Clutter murder. Dick’s psychopathic tendencies not only lead him to extensively plan all his crimes before he commits them, but also explain his inability to form deep bonds. His failure to have real emotional attachment can be seen by the speed at which he turns on Perry when things in his plan begin to go south. Once Dick hears that there is a witness that links him to the Clutter murder, despite him knowing that there was a good chance it could be Wells, he immediately begins to think about what Perry could say. “Come right down to it, Floyd wasn’t half as dangerous as Perry. Perry, if he lost his nerve and let fly, could put them both in The Corner. And suddenly he saw the truth, it was Perry he ought to have silence. … Why had it never occurred to him until now? For now, now was much too late” (228). Dick’s emotions toward Perry emphasize his lack of guilt and willingness to hurt his friend to help himself. His realization foreshaddows his later confession to the police, where he blames all the murders in the Clutter family on Perry and does not acknolweging his role in the crime. “‘[Dick] says he tried to stop you, Perry. But says he couldn’t. Says he was scared you’d shoot him too,’ and ‘Yes, sir, Perry. It’s all your fault. Hickock himself, he says he wouldn’t harm the fleas on a dog.’...’Hickcock tells us you’re a natural born-killer. Says it doesn’t bother you a bit” (232). Despite the truth that Perry shot all four members of the Clutter family, Dick lies many times in his confession in order to protect himself. This decision not only shows his lack of regard for others,but it also illustrates another crime Dick has committed, which is lying to the authorities, especially because he signed it as a true confession. Dick’s psychopathic behavior causes him to be more guilty of a crime than Perry as his detachment to people and his subsequent disregard for them leads him to not only commit the crime in the first place, but also to lie to the police in order to incriminate Perry to help himself. 
Dick’s orchestration of the crime and manipulation of Perry’s mental state to help Dick rob and murder the Clutter family makes Dick more guilty of the tragedy than Perry. Through their portrayal, Capote highlights that knowing right versus wrong is more important than the physical actions a person may take because he emphasizes the planning Dick put into the execution of the crime, as well as the small crimes he wants to commit along the way. Additionally, Capote demonstrates the importance of one's childhood and the significance of mental health. Because Perry grows up with a traumatic childhood, he develops a sociopathic mindset as a result of the abuse he has endured. This differs from Dick, who despite growing up in a loving home, has a personality disorder that results in psychopathic tendencies, leading to him lacking proper morals. Capote shows the impact of mental health on one’s morals by emphasizing the point that intellectual knowledge is of greater importance than physical actions. 
