
	The August day is a clear-cut picture in my mind. The sky was pulled taut and clean by a shining sun. The strain was a constant feeling, one foot in front of the other. My velcroed shoes hit the ground with irregular strides. Perspiration beaded my forehead, it branched off into tiny rivers, streaming down my face and pooling in divots of my body. This is not who I am was a sentiment that the trees seemed to reflect back at me. I was a thinker, a watcher, a laugher, a crier. I could read about the hikers on the trails, look up pictures of them, but I was usually the one watching behind a screen or pages of a book. I was a bird, being carried by the wind. I was not the rabbit hopping over branches and hills. The breeze carried the evergreen smell of the trees around me - I was thankful for it. The crisp smells distracted from the sweat and the aches filling my entire body. Thick foliage, greens, browns, and yellows all blurred together closed in on me from either side. The path was a run on sentence, punctuated by protruding roots and the squeals of birds. Without these birds, there was only the calm silence of the woods. My friend Percy, who had tried to strike up conversations in the early minutes of the hike, had fallen silent as my breathless responses had dwindled. Her mother and sister, a few paces ahead, were mute. Even with my various aches, I wished that this state of anticipation could be eternal. I wished for an erasure of a destination. Of course, there was a destination. Phelps Cliff was 30 feet high. A Wyoming-wide famous cliff. 30 feet of jutting gray stone, slippery and dewy. My sharp awareness that each footstep brought me closer made the air feel like mud. 
I didn’t do this sort of exercise anymore, my family was the kind to sit on the couch together, to eat together, to cook together. We did not hike, raft, jump, or ski together. All of this, the bugs, bees and mud,  is not who I am. With the Wayne’s it was different. There was no “no.” There was no “I am too tired” “I don’t feel like it” “I don’t want to.” A course was set, and you finished the hike. There was no gazing over the edge of the cliff, weighing options in the palm of your hand. You counted down and jumped at 1. My ankles itched with bug spray. I was determined to not get another bite again. I eyed each and every ant with suspicion. 1.5 years of lyme disease had worn me out, the last thing I needed was a double infection. I was tired, and I was used to explaining that I was tired. My family was used to accepting that I was tired, I was used to sitting. I was not used to these branches, winds, and hikes. As the brambles scratched me, getting dirt on my legs, all I could think was This is not who I am.
Each step took me closer to the rock. I had seen it in pictures - never in person. I had never felt the shadow of its loom. I had never stepped on it, the sun pounding my back, or wind whistling in my ears. Through the trees, the lights of a clearing began to shine, and through the cracks created by the branches, voices carried through the wind. Splashes began to illuminate the silence, intermingling with teh bird calls. I could hear the squeals, each high-pitched notes weighing on me. Finally, when the perspiration had puddled to the point of a drench, and I thought that my knees might just give out, we reached the rock. Percy beckoned to me and I peeled my clothes from my body, revealing a tight blue and white one piece. We joined the line on the rock. Only a few people stood atop it. Among them, three teenage boys, a little girl, and her smiling father. If these teenage boys were scared to take the leap, how could I be expected to even attempt it? Percy was a natural at these types of things. Her ginger hair sparkled in the sunlight, the lake unfolded in front of us - a flat pool. It was encircled with trees, and birds flew across the clear sky. Although the lake was clear and clean, the air smelled like mud and dirt. My attention turned to the ground, to Percy’s mother standing below the cliff, iphone in hand “3, 2, 1” she counted down. Percy flew down in a single swift motion. A red ponytail streaming behind her, blazing down and extinguished by the lake. She was sure, she was strong. I look down. This is not who I am. It was my turn. I stood.
The scenery was visible past my trembling toes. Clear water expanded in all directions. The top of the rock was flat, there were no divots, no holes to swallow my feet, and yet I was ankle-deep. My arms spanned out on either side of me - my knees bent, but stuck. A picture-perfect image of the moment before. I was a compressed spring, and yet I would not expand. A scratched CD, unable to play. A jump? Cold water, 5 horrible seconds of in-air suspension. I better jump far enough. I could end up hitting the rock. I will never recover if I hit the rock.  “Go Mel!” Voices from below. Cheering on. Voices behind me too. Other people want me to go. They want a turn, they want a taste of that sickening, sickening clear water. I took a step back, I can do this. A running start is just what I need. I bend my shoulders back and force one foot after the other. I stop short. I take another step back, but this time to let the others go. They have been waiting. The little girl closes her eyes and takes the leap. Oh how I hate that stupid pink swim suit she wears. Is it raining? Oh no. The moisture is not a rescuing mountain storm, but tears that stream down my face.  This is not who I am. Percy is now back up behind me on the rock. I am still ankle-deep, I do not know how she got her legs to move so fast up to me. How are her ankles not so stuck in the sand as me? “Mel, let’s do it together.” I am too stuck, there is no stepping out, there is no solution. I swallow. It is all salt - the tears, the sweat, the dryness of the air that somehow still hangs heavily and dampens me. She grabs my hand before I can say no. “If you don’t jump, I will get hurt, so you have to.” What a reassuring best friend I have. “3-2-1.” I ran and this time I could not stop. 
 My eyes are wide, the air is cold. What have I done? When will this be over? Green blurs around me. I whip my neck. 4. I look over at Percy. How is she smiling right now? Her ponytail is blazing again, just like the first time she jumped. This time however, I am up close, its presence is scorching. 3. I can hear the people on the rock still. They are standing on solid ground, they are laughing. I can hear them clapping that I finally jumped. That’s embarrassing. 2. What was it that Ms. Wayne told me? Point your toes? Do I put my hands up or do I cross them? Do I plug my nose and hold my breath? There is so little time and I am so unprepared.  1. How am I still in the air? How have I not hit the water? I have been hear for an eternity? Perhaps I will be stuck here too, and I will never get out. This is just not who I am. 0. I splash. 
Returning to the hills and lakes of Jackson three years later, is a glove. The trails leading up to Phelps are well-beaten with footsteps of tradition. The air is not quiet, I laugh the entire hike. I imagine that the birds still squeal and interrupt an otherwise silent mountain, tbut I cannot hear them anymore. The air is cool and light, but this is still a difficult hike. My laces stomp each root and half-skip over every bend of the trial. The familiar clearing appears. I can practically taste the sweetness of the lights oozing through the trees. I change behind a bush into my bathing suit. Percy and I climb the rock. She jumps first - no hesitation. Some things never change. I look out at the expansive lake, the same trees, the same circle, the same squeals and calls from people on and around the cliff. My toes hang over the edge. I look down - my stomach drops at the height. This is not who I am, I think. I chuckle, and I jump.


	This passage shows that Macbeth’s guilt is overwhelming to the point that it has caused him to avoid facing his own conscience at all costs. Personifying Time, he asks that his “dread,” his grim fate, be postponed. At the beginning of the story, Macbeth was hopeful about his fate and becoming king. Now he believes that because he has committed such dreadful actions, his own fate will end dreadfully as well. He pleads with Time to help him to avoid this inevitable end. Macbeth wanted to be king but to him this whole situation has gotten out of hand - and he knows that he is at fault. Everything is moving too fast. It’s as if Macbeth did not have the proper time to think through his actions and now he is suddenly a king who has facilitated the murder of his best friend and is in constant danger of facing repercussions. Lady Macbeth’s criticisms of his “human-ness” and his conscience have gotten to Macbeth. The guilt that Macbeth is facing is unimaginable, and he just wants to escape it. He has adopted a new view on how he should conduct his life: “from this moment the very firstlings of my heart shall be the firstlings of my hand” (4.1.167). At the beginning of the story, Macbeth was a careful and calculating character. He was very hesitant to murder Duncan, and only did so becasue of pressure from Lady Macbeth. Now the second he feels something, Macbeth has resolved to act on that feeling. Macbeth fears that his conscience, once so central to his character, will prevent him from doing what he needs to do to protect himself. Macbeth now believes that rather than being an asset, his conscience makes him dangerously weak. He wants to take no pauses to consider if what he is doing is morally wrong; he just wants to act: “be it thought and done” (4.1.169).  This is just what Lady Macbeth has been trying to convince Macbeth to do throughout the story. Her words have finally gotten to him. Macbeth now feels that he must make a choice between doing the right thing (that is, not murdering more people) and protecting himself from the repercussions of his previous murders. Macbeth still has a conscience, and he knows that if he allows himself to take a moment and think about his actions, he will not be able to go through with more murders. What’s more, the guilt of having committed such awful deeds might very well drive Macbeth to the point of insanity. Macbeth decides that he will go to the palace of Macduff and eliminate his entire bloodline. Talking to himself as much as to Lennox he instructs “no boasting like a fool; this deed I’ll do before this purpose cool” (4.1.174). It’s almost as if each new plot that Macbeth dreams up is hot and steaming. When an idea is being formed, it is not yet able to be processed. Before the “purpose [cools]” or before Macbeth can really consider his own actions, he wants to execute. This again demonstrates that Macbeth is stuck in an effort to stay ahead of his own feelings of guilt.  At the conclusion of this speech, he immediately springs to action, leaving no time to waste: “But no more sights!” (4.1.177). This again shows that Macbeth desires to move at a rate in which his conscience cannot catch up with him. Overall this passage shows that Macbeth has shifted from a character loyal to his own morals to one who lives in fear of his own conscience. 

In 19th century America, white was the only race that enjoyed any sort of fundamental rights. One such right was the right to make mistakes. Whilst a white person could make a thousand mistakes a day and not pay the price, a black person coould be punished for a tiny mistake such as spilling a drink. During this time, white Americans made innumerable mistakes with their treatment of black people and their adoption of white supremacy. In The Underground Railroad by Colson Whitehead, some of the white supremacists begin to realize that their ideologies are flawed. These white supremacists are thus terrified at the guilt that will overtake them when they fully understand the atrocities that they have committed. Cora is a run-away slave. She is on the run from the notorious slave-catcher Ridgeway. In his everyday work, Ridgeway sees evidence of black people being just as capable and having the potential for just as much power as white people. Recognizing his flawed actions, Ridgeway is constantly forced to ignore signs of his mistakes if he wants to uphold the white supremacy he values so greatly and avoid crushign guilt. This constant struggle between hsi subconscious and his belief system causes much inner conflict and fragility within him. On her journey, Cora makes it to South Carolina - a seemingly racially tolerant town where she comes to work in a museum - as one of the actresses behind the glass. Working here, white people ogle at her, but the second she gives them any look back,  they avert their eyes, reminded of the person that they are looking at, and ashamed of the wrong they have done. Cora also spends some time in North Carolina, and in Valentine farm. The people of North Carolina see black people as a living reflection of their crimes, and because of this fear they eliminate them entirely from the town. At Valentine farm, a thriving black society, a white mob destroys it. The whites of Indiana refuse to see a living breathing sign of white supremacy being flawed. The white people in The Underground Railroad, have begun to realize that their ideology of white supremacy is flawed, and they are scared of the repercussions, whether that be Hell, or having to look in the mirror, of their immoral actions. Thus, through different methods, Ridgeway, the people of South Carolina, and the whites near North Carolina and Valentine farm attempt to cover up the evidence of their flawed ideas. 

BP #1 -
	The nature of Ridgeways job causes him to constantly come into contact with exceedingly capable black people, and scared of acknowledging black power, Ridgeway constantly pushes aside his feelings of doubt, causing his internal struggle. There is simply no way that Ridgeway could justify being a slave-catcher if he wasn’t convinced that white people were meant to be above blacks. White supremacy is the cornerstone of his belief system; “if ****** were supposed to have their freedom, they wouldn’t be in chains…If the white man wasn’t destined to take this new world, he wouldn’t own it now” (82). White supremacy means that Ridgeway can see himself as a man who maintains order, rather than one who causes harm. Without it, he would be the cruel savage person he claims black people are. Black people aren’t “supposed” to be free according to Ridgeway. This word doesn’t just create a sense of urgency, it paints a picture. It creates an image of a world where black people weren’t subjugated. It makes it seem like this world would be pure chaos. It’s not supposed to be an equal world according to Ridgeway. Ridgeway also talks about what races are “destined” for what outcomes. This word ties into the idea of American Exceptionalism - that America is blessed by God. It also reminds the reader of Manifest Destiny. Altogether, it creates this idea of divine intervention - it creates the idea that God wants whtie supremacy to rule. Ridgeway also explains how the white men “own” this new world. This is in a sense true - it’s a bad time to be a Person of Color in America. “Own” creates this sense of possession, similar to the possession that white people fought to maintain over enslaved people. People are not objects, they can’t really be possessed. However, Ridgeway has to keep coming back to this ideology. He has to keep reminding himself that he is fulfilling God’s purpose. With evey slave Ridgeway caught, he proved to himself time and time again that he was superior. He justified the cruelty he saw and caused. He proved to the white people around him that they were better than the black people, because if they weren’t, why did the black people not successfully run away? Literally, Ridgeway’s job is to catch runaways, but symbolically, each battle that Ridgeway wins is another data point that white people can use to back up their ideologies. However, Ridgeway doesn’t catch every slave, and each time he fails he is confronted by the flawed logic in his ideas. Each time he fails, Ridgeway is consumed by a bothersome feeling of self-doubt “Mabel’s disappearance nagged at him longer than it should have, buzzing in the stronghold of his mind” (84). “Nag” means to bother, but traditionally, it could mean to gnaw or nibble (OED). If Ridgeway’s white supremacy is a full loaf of bread, the losing of Mabel is a fly to him. It nibbles, it causes discomfort. Ridgeway waves it away, time and time again, but he refuses to pause for a moment and consider the fly’s presence - he refuses to look the fly in the eye. If he looked the fly in the eye, he would realize that the reason it fought so hard for the bread was that the bread was rotten. Each loss nags him unrelentingly, because with each loss a voice in the back of his head tells him: how could someone who is inherently inferior escape my clutches? But he waves this away, getting more and more fragile, under the weight of his realizations, until he will inevitably break under the weight of his mistakes. Whitehead also states that this nagging goes on for a longer time than it “should have.” The word “should'' implies a preconceived notion of what is meant to happen. “Should” is an expectation. This word means that as someone on the front lines of white supremacy, Ridgeway needs believe that everything he does is backed up by a rock solid ideology. He needs be 100% sure that black people are worse than whites. For anyone who is totally sound on an idea, one failure, one missed step “should '' go away fairly easily. But for Ridgeway, each missed step bothers him endlessly. Again, this ties into the metaphor of the nibbling fly. Ridgeway is constantly bothered by the fact that he lost Mabel, it “buzzes' ' in his head like a fly. “Buzzing'' also reminds one of heavy machinery. A constant motion, wheels turning. It is as if the loss of Mable has set into motion wheels turning in Ridgeway's head. He is not quite sure where the wheels will take him now, but it is a constant thought. Ridgeway’s subconscious is just at the verge of a realization that his ideas are wrong - but he swats these ideas away like a fly. Although he is someone who regularly enforces white supremacy, Ridgeway is unsure of his own racist ideas, and thus every failure that he makes eats away at him. His fears that his ideals fo white supremacy are mirrored throughotu the entire community of South Carolina.


Cora’s time in the South Carolina museum shows how South Carolinian society is afraid of the crushing guilt that will come with realizing the flaws of white supremacy. In order to feel good about themselves and their actions, white supremacists must see themselves as saviors of inferior races. As seen with Ridgeway, maintaining this sense of superiority is not easy, in fact it requires maintenance. South Carolina is a town that gives ex-slaves a false sense of security and freedom. Cora ends up working in a museum there. Creating this museum, with a gentler picture of the lives of enslaved people helps ease any doubts that white supremacists have. Cora recognizes that this false image is being portrayed while working behind the museum glass;  “No slave had ever keeled over dead at a spinning wheel or been butchered for a tangle. But nobody wanted to speak on the true position of the world” (119). The words “keeled over dead” exhibits a very different image than the white-savior image that supremacists desire to see themselves as. It is an image of cruelty and savagery - and it is the white people who are the cruel savages. The museum is a tool used by the white supremacists to assure themselves that their actions are justified. The word “true” is a shining light. It means honesty, and it means justice. Cora describes the exhibit not as the “true” image of slavery. That implies that this image is unjust, and morally wrong to convey. Cora also addresses that “nobody wanted to speak” on the realities of cruel slavery. This phrase creates the image of hushed voices. It creates the images of fingers, sushing those who dare to bring up the injustices being done. But even more than that, it is a white person looking in the mirror, and putting a finger to their lips. It is that person telling themself -- “do not say it” -- because if they admit that they are the ones being cruel and savage, how can they even look in the mirror? This feeling of discomfort is brought up in South Carolina when Cora begins making stern facial expressions at the visitors of the museum “They always broke, the people, not expecting this weird attack, staggering back or looking at the floor or forcing their companions to pull them away” (129). The people that Cora meets with her expressions “[look] at the floor.” This gesture is universal - it means shame. Happy to ogle at the people behind the glass, the white people staring at Cora are overcome with a wave of shame when they are hit by this momentary confrontation. The people behind the glass were people, and they could make faces back. Cora describes her looks as “[attacks].” No other word is more suited to describe the effect that they have on the white people staring through the glass. An attack means violence, but more specifically it means a sudden surge of discomfort (OED). Attack is a knife, stabbing you in the chest. The stares of Cora stab the white people in the chest. It is as if a sudden veil, one that they have been fighting to keep on themselves, is lifted off with extreme force. The people are slapped in the face with a reality check. They cannot ignore their actions anymore. They are the cruel ones. They are the savage ones who end human life. And they downcast their eyes because how can they look into the eyes of the victim of their cruelty without simply collapsing? The people have quite literally “[broken],” a word that means shattered, and irreparable (OED). The walls they have put up to block out the voices in their head telling them they have made grave and irreparable mistakes has crumbled. When Cora glared back at the white people, they felt as if they had just been confronted by Hell itself. They slink away to their caves of shame. The museum of South Carolina is a prime example of the fake narrative that white people convince themselves of in order to justify their subjugation of blacks. It shows just how quickly ogling eyes can turn into shame and misery, and how weak the ideas of white supremacy is. The museum was made so that the people could convince themselves of their right-ness. It was made so white people, whenever they doubted themselves, or couldn't look in the mirror, could walk down the street and see a physical reminder that they weren’t really doing anything wrong. So when the actors of the museum confront them, even a little bit, the white people are hit with fear and the weight of their actions. Altogether, the museum of South Carolina is meant to be a tool through which the white people can strengthen their white supremacy, but it ends up proving just how scared they are to lose the facade they put up. North Carolina and Valentine farm both also contain white people scared of uncovering the horrible-ness of their actions. However, in these places, this fear manifests itself in a different way.

BP #3 - 
	In North Carolina and Valentine Farm, the white people seek to destroy all evidence of their wrongdoings so they can push their sins out of their minds. The sophisticated ideas and thriving black society of Valentine farm challenged the white supremacist notion that black people were cruel animals. The white townspeople saw this thriving society as proof of the fact that their actions were immoral - because the people they were abusing were intelligent and capable. So the whites near Valentine farm had to destroy the farm not only to destroy the evidence of their flawed ideology, but to reinforce in their mind that they were in fact superior. Some might argue that the actions of white people in this book are not due to the fear of internal repercussions, like guilt of hell, but of external repercussions, like being killed in a black uprising. Cora recognizes that white people possess this fear; “She might kill one of them next. And because of that fear, they erected a new scaffolding of oppression on the cruel foundation laid hundreds of years before” (176). This argument is not absurd; the white people are surely afraid of a black uprising. Sure, most people would be scared that the race they have subjugated for centuries might want to return some of the violence. However, this is not the main concern of white people afraid of their past actions. The fear of external repercussions is not the fear that leads to the destruction of Valentine farm. Valentine farm was a peaceful place, and anyone would understand that it posed no wild threat to society. It existed to coexist in a predominantly white society, and so the destruction of Valentine Farm could just not have logically come from a desire to eliminate a real physical threat. Although it wasn’t a threat to the physical safety of white supremacists though, Valentine farm was a dangerous symbol. This was because it showed black power, and an ability for black people to run a well-functioning and peaceful community. It was a society that showed the white supremacists that their ideas had to be wrong about black people - and that terrified them, Nothing could be scarier than having to see the evidence of their wrongdoings everyday; there is nothing white supremacists fear more than looking in the mirror and seeing their sins stare back. During the raid of Valentine “the white men outside whooped and howled over the carnage” (292). This image depicts the true essence of white supremacy. Scared of being seen as cruel, the men destroy the town. However, it seems like they are the true savages in this situation. When the word “howl” is brought up it brings up an animal-like image. Monkeys are often described as “howling” and this inhuman indecency is reflective of the ideas of white supremacy. “Carnage” is unrestricted chaos. Like vultures and a carcass, they swarm. The reason that the white people are so excited about this victory, is because it reinforces their ideas. They feel like their ideologies are backed up and they are rightfully superior. Now when they look into the mirror, they can flex their muscles and see themselves as the rightful top dogs. The reasoning behind destroying Valentine farm goes even deeper. Each and every day the white supremacists woke up, and each and every night they went to sleep, the whtie people of Indiana closed their eyes and saw a reminder of their sins. They saw proof that their ideologies were flawed. No white supremacist would ever admit it - but the whites felt that farm in every action they took. They felt it like a knife in their heart. It was a stabbing pain that told them they were going to Hell for what they had done. This never ceasing guilt led them to this state of “carnage.” It drove them past the point of control, and into an animal-like frenzy of violence. Similarly, the people of North Carolina are scared of what thriving black people represent. Afraid of a reminder of their sins each and every day, they get rid of black people entirely; “They abolished slavery. On the contrary, Oney Garrison said in response. We abolished ******... The new race laws forbid colored men and women from setting food on North Carolina soil” (168). The people in North Carolina were most likely farther along in the progression of realizing the flaws of white supremacy than those of South Carolina. They probably already believe that they are going to hell, because they know how wrong their abuse of black people has been. They are scared of these consequences, and they are scared of having to wake up every day and face the people they have so violently mistreated. They are naked and bare because the veil they have hid behind for so long has been ripped away. The white people need to get rid of the evidence of their cruelty - they need to find some way to assuage their constant guilt. They decide to destroy the evidence by making sure no black people can ever set foot near them.  “Forbid” is a strong word. It shows the violence of the white people. By eliminating all black presence, they eliminate the reminders of their wrongdoings. Like those near Valentine farm, fear of having to confront the truth drives them into a rage-like white mob state. In both the Valentine farm and South Carolina a fear of facing their own actions throws white people into an animal-like rage. 

Conclusion:
	White people in The Underground Railroad deal with their doubts about white supremacy and subsequent fear of internal repercussions in differing ways. Ridgeway, a man who is confronted by proof of black power every day, lives in an ever-fragile state of self-doubt. The South Carolinians attempt to assuage their guilt by painting a more idealistic picture of slavery in their heads. However, even a second of confrontation leaves them with their head down, full of shame. Finally, the people in Valentine Farm and South Carolina destroy as much evidence of their wrongdoings as possible. They believe that they can be free from their self-loathing if only they got rid of all evidence of their sins. The Underground Railroad is set almost 200 years ago. Thus one would think that those who deny the graveness of slavery or seek to uphold white supremacist values have long died. One would expect that nowadays, America should contain only individuals who would give their lives to preserve equality. But in fact, white people’s fear of facing racism, past and present, remains at the forefront of modern politics. The 1619 project is a method of teaching history that seeks to look at the US’s history in a new lens; it centers learning about the true cruelty of slavery (Barbara Rodriguez). It doesn’t hide the presence of white supremacy in American history. Unlike other school curriculums, it tells the story of America's success along with its darkest parts. Today there are anti-1619 project bills being used to limit its usage. One bill passed in Missouri would outlaw using the 1619 project as an example of “an accurate account or representation of the founding and history of the United States of America” (Barbara Rodriguez). These sentiments are uncannily similar to the ones expressed by the white supremacists in The Underground Railroad. There are still people in the US who desire to get rid of the irreversible mistakes that were made in the early years of the country’s founding. Instead of facing the sins of the Founding Fathers head on, they seek to destroy all evidence of slavery, and its true atrocity. It is upsetting to realize that almost 200 years after the abolishment of slavery, there are still people that clutch to the false ideas that it wasn’t “that bad.” Like the people in this book, modern day white supremacists are afraid of the guilt they will feel when they acknowledge that they still benefit from racism. They do not want to admit that their white-ness gives them inherent privileges, they want to block out the racist history of America. However, denial is never the way to deal with an issue as serious as racism. One day, I believe that the US will move past this point of denial. We will realize that although there is no way to ever truly make things right, hiding from our history means we can never start. 