	At its most fundamental level, identity answers the question of who one is. Though simple in theory, much more lies beneath the surface of identity. In Oedipus the King, author Sophocles dissects and examines the concept of identity in the context of Oedipus' own journey of self-discovery. The play follows the sharp decline of the powerful, beloved King Oedipus as he uncovers his true identity: that he is his father’s murderer, his mother’s husband, and the curse plaguing his people. Oedipus’ journey in which he must discard his previous understanding of his own identity specifically draws attention to the dominance of fate over free will in shaping one’s identity. The play additionally distinguishes between the truth and one’s perception of the truth in the context of self-understanding, suggesting that sight and truth do not go hand in hand. Throughout the play, Sophocles’ utilizes Oedipus’ journey of self-discovery to illustrate the roles of fate versus free will and truth versus perceived truth in defining one’s existence, ultimately asserting the uncontrollable nature of identity. 
	Sophocles employs the dramatic change in Oedipus' understanding of his identity upon learning of his destiny to suggest that identity belongs entirely to the unruly hands of fate. Living in blissful ignorance, Oedipus is on top of the world as the narrative begins. His identity is defined greatly by power, success, and the admiration of others. He is the hero who solved the riddle of the Sphynx, saving Thebes and its people. As king, his people worship and “bend to [him], [his] power” (Sophocles, 161). When he learns of the curse plaguing Thebes, he vows “to learn what he might do or say to save [the] city” (Sophocles, 162). By his action and free will, including his quest to remove the curse from Thebes, Oedipus crafts an identity defined by greatness and heroicness. Only in the ignorance of his truth and the curse of his birth, however, can Oedipus hold on to this identity he has built for himself. When the prophet reveals Oedipus' fate, that he has been destined from birth to kill his father and marry his mother, Oedipus’ previously conceived identity crumbles. In the presence of fate, action and free will are essentially negligible. No matter what decisions he makes in his life, Oedipus' fate will remain and will be the defining factor of his identity. He is truly “born for pain,” his unfortunate destiny entirely predetermined from birth (232). Oedipus is blind to who he really is for most of his life, his true identity only exposed upon the reveal of his fate. Sophocles displays Oedipus' journey in learning his own destiny to emphasize the dominance of fate over free will in the definition of who an individual is. 
	In Oedipus the King, Sophocles additionally suggests the intertwined nature of truth and identity, specifically exploring the role of one’s perception of the truth in shaping, or misshaping, one’s understanding of self. Sophocles asserts that sight and truth are not the same. Throughout the play, Oedipus' perception of himself blinds him to his own true identity. To himself, as well as to those around him, he is Oedipus the almighty. He has a large ego and is greatly self-righteous. Holding the same perception, the people of Thebes greatly admire Oedipus, rating him “first of men” (161).  At one point in the play, he even proclaims his own greatness, asserting to Tiresias, the blind prophet, how he heroically “stopped the Sphinx” solely with “the flight of [his] own intelligence” (Sophocles, 182). Ironically, it is Tiresias, who has no sight at all, who can actually see the truth of Oedipus' identity: Oedipus with “his precious eye” is “blind to the corruption of [his] life” (183). An unnecessary addition to the play, the irony of Tiresias’s blindness and Oedipus' sight serves to further Sophocles’s assertion that what seems to be true and the truth are often not the same. Though he seems good and a hero to his city, the truth reveals that he is, in fact, the cause of his city’s detriment. In Oedipus the King, Sophocles portrays Oedipus clinging to a false identity to suggest the fundamental disjunction between one’s perception of the truth and what is really true, as well as to note the connection between truth and identity. 
Oedipus the King explores the concept of identity, suggesting, through Oedipus' journey of self-realization, the false security often provided by this notion and its fundamental uncontrollability. Sophocles expertly distinguishes identity as how one is defined in the world, as opposed to how one defines oneself in the world. He assigns fate as this overarching, godly power that determines who each individual is within the world. Sophocles’ assertions about identity in this play, as intended, leave readers with queries about their own identity. If it is true that one’s fate, one’s set-in-stone destiny from the day they are born, determines their identity, is it true that every individual is born either good or evil? Such is the reason fate versus free will has been continuously debated over centuries and works such as Sophocles’ expertly crafted Oedipus the King remain so relevant in the world of literature today. 
